



Produced by eagkw, Suzanne Shell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







  A Fortnight of Folly

  BY
  MAURICE THOMPSON

  AUTHOR OF
  "Alice of Old Vincennes," "A Banker of Bankersville," etc.

  [Illustration]

  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  STREET & SMITH, PUBLISHERS




  Copyright, 1888
  By THE ALDEN PUBLISHING COMPANY

  Copyright, 1902
  By STREET & SMITH

  A Fortnight of Folly




CONTENTS


  A FORTNIGHT OF FOLLY.
  THE TALE OF A SCULPTOR, by HUGH CONWAY
  CARRISTON'S GIFT.




A FORTNIGHT OF FOLLY.


I.

The Hotel Helicon stood on a great rock promontory that jutted far out
into a sea of air whose currents and eddies filled a wide, wild valley
in the midst of our southern mountain region. It was a new hotel, built
by a Cincinnati man who founded his fortune in natural gas speculations,
and who had conceived the bright thought of making the house famous at
the start by a stroke of rare liberality.

Viewing the large building from any favorable point in the valley, it
looked like a huge white bird sitting with outstretched wings on the
gray rock far up against the tender blue sky. All around it the forests
were thick and green, the ravines deep and gloomy and the rocks tumbled
into fantastic heaps. When you reached it, which was after a whole day
of hard zig-zag climbing, you found it a rather plain three-story house,
whose broad verandas were worried with a mass of jig-saw fancies and
whose windows glared at you between wide open green Venetian shutters.
Everything look new, almost raw, from the stumps of fresh-cut trees on
the lawn and the rope swings and long benches, upon which the paint
was scarcely dry, to the resonant floor of the spacious halls and the
cedar-fragrant hand-rail of the stairway.

There were springs among the rocks. Here the water trickled out with a
red gleam of iron oxide, there it sparkled with an excess of carbonic
acid, and yonder it bubbled up all the more limpid and clear on account
of the offensive sulphuretted hydrogen it was bringing forth. Masses
of fern, great cushions of cool moss and tangles of blooming shrubs
and vines fringed the sides of the little ravines down which the
spring-streams sang their way to the silver thread of a river in the
valley.

It was altogether a dizzy perch, a strange, inconvenient, out-of-the-way
spot for a summer hotel. You reached it all out of breath, confused as
to the points of the compass and disappointed, in every sense of the
word, with what at first glance struck you as a colossal pretense,
empty, raw, vulgar, loud--a great trap into which you had been inveigled
by an eloquent hand-bill! Hotel Helicon, as a name for the place, was
considered a happy one. It had come to the proprietor, as if in a dream,
one day as he sat smoking. He slapped his thigh with his hand and sprang
to his feet. The word that went so smoothly with hotel, as he fancied,
had no special meaning in his mind, for the gas man had never been
guilty of classical lore-study, but it furnished a taking alliteration.

"Hotel Helicon, Hotel Helicon," he repeated; "that's just a dandy name.
Hotel Helicon on Mount Boab, open for the season! If that doesn't get
'em I'll back down."

His plans matured themselves very rapidly in his mind. One brilliant
idea followed another in swift succession, until at last he fell upon
the scheme of making Hotel Helicon free for the initial season to a
select company of authors chosen from among the most brilliant and
famous in our country.

"Zounds!" he exclaimed, all to himself, "but won't that be a darling old
advertisement! I'll have a few sprightly newspaper people along with
'em, too, to do the interviewing and puffing. By jacks, it's just the
wrinkle to a dot!"

Mr. Gaslucky was of the opinion that, like Napoleon, he was in the hands
of irresistible destiny which would ensure the success of whatever he
might undertake; still he was also a realist and depended largely upon
tricks for his results. He had felt the great value of what he liked to
term legitimate advertising, and he was fond of saying to himself that
any scheme would succeed if properly set before the world. He regarded
it a maxim that anything which can be clearly described is a fact. His
realism was the gospel of success, he declared, and needed but to be
stated to be adopted by all the world.

From the first he saw how his hotel was to be an intellectual focus;
moreover he designed to have it radiate its own glory like a star set
upon Mt. Boab.

The difficulties inherent in this project were from the first quite
apparent to Mr. Gaslucky, but he was full of expedients and cunning.
He had come out of the lowest stratum of life, fighting his way up to
success, and his knowledge of human nature was accurate if not very
broad.

Early in the summer, about the first days of June, in fact, certain
well-known and somewhat distinguished American authors received by
due course of mail an autograph letter from Mr. Gaslucky, which was
substantially as follows:

  CINCINNATI, O., May 30, 1887.

  MY DEAR SIR:

  The Hotel Helicon, situated on the Lencadian promontory, far up the
  height of Mt. Boab and overlooking the glorious valley of the Big
  Mash River, amid the grandest scenery of the Cumberland Mountains,
  where at their southern extremity they break into awful peaks,
  chasms and escarpments, is now thrown open to a few favored guests
  for the summer. The proprietor in a spirit of liberality (and for
  the purpose of making this charming hotel known to a select public)
  is issuing a few special invitations to distinguished people to come
  and spend the summer free of charge. You are cordially and urgently
  invited. The Hotel Helicon is a place to delight the artist and the
  _litterateur_. It is high, airy, cool, surrounded by wild scenes,
  good shooting and fishing at hand, incomparable mineral springs,
  baths, grottos, dark ravines and indeed everything engaging to the
  imagination. The proprietor will exhaust effort to make his chosen
  guests happy. The rooms are new, sweet, beautifully furnished and
  altogether comfortable, and the table will have every delicacy of
  the season served in the best style. There will be no uninvited
  guests, all will be chosen from the most exalted class. Come, and
  for one season taste the sweets of the dews of Helicon, without
  money and without price.

  If you accept this earnest and cordial invitation, notify me at
  once. Hotel Helicon is at your command.

  Truly yours,
  ISAIAH R. GASLUCKY.

It is needless to say that this letter was the product of a professional
advertising agent employed for the occasion by the proprietor of Hotel
Helicon. The reader will observe the earmarks of the creation and
readily recognize the source. Of course, when the letter was addressed
to a woman there was a change, not only in the gender of the terms, but
in the tone, which took on a more persuasive color. The attractions
of the place were described in more poetic phrasing and a cunningly
half-hidden thread of romance, about picturesque mountaineers and
retired and reformed bandits, was woven in.

Naturally enough, each individual who received this rather uncommon
letter, read it askance, at first, suspecting a trick, but the
newspapers soon cleared the matter up by announcing that Mr. Isaiah
Gaslucky, of Cincinnati, had "conceived the happy idea of making his
new and picturesque Hotel Helicon free this season to a small and
select company of distinguished guests. The hotel will not be open to
the public until next year."

And thus it came to pass that in midsummer such a company as never
before was assembled, met on Mt. Boab and made the halls of Hotel
Helicon gay with their colors and noisy with their mirth. The woods,
the dizzy cliffs, the bubbling springs, the cool hollows, the windy
peaks and the mossy nooks were filled with song, laughter, murmuring
under-tones of sentiment, or something a little sweeter and warmer, and
there were literary conversations, and critical talks, and jolly satire
bandied about, with some scraps of adventure and some bits of rather
ludicrous mishap thrown in for variety.

Over all hung a summer sky, for the most part cloudless, and the days
were as sweet as the nights were delicious.


II.

In the afternoon of a breezy day, at the time when the shadows were
taking full possession of the valley, the coach arrived at Hotel Helicon
from the little railway station at the foot of Mt. Boab.

A man, the only passenger, alighted from his perch beside the driver and
for a moment stood as if a little dazed by what he saw.

He was very short, rather round and stout, and bore himself quietly,
almost demurely. His head was large, his feet and hands were small and
his face wore the expression of an habitual good humor amounting nearly
to jolliness, albeit two vertical wrinkles between his brows hinted of a
sturdy will seated behind a heavy Napoleonic forehead. The stubby tufts
of grizzled hair that formed his mustaches shaded a mouth and chin at
once strong and pleasing. He impressed the group of people on the hotel
veranda most favorably, and at once a little buzz of inquiry circulated.
No one knew him.

That this was an important arrival could not be doubted; it was felt at
once and profoundly. Great men carry an air of individuality about with
them; each, like a planet, has his own peculiar atmosphere by which his
light is modified. There was no mistaking the light in this instance; it
indicated a luminary of the first magnitude.

Unfortunately the guests at Hotel Helicon were not required to record
their names in a register, therefore the new comer could bide his own
time to make himself known.

Miss Alice Moyne, of Virginia, the beautiful young author of two or
three picturesque short stories lately published in a popular magazine,
was in conversation with Hartley Crane, the rising poet from Kentucky,
just at the moment when this new arrival caused a flutter on the
veranda.

"Oh, I do wonder if he can be Edgar De Vere?" she exclaimed.

"No," said Hartley Crane, "I have seen De Vere; he is as large and as
fascinating as his romances. That little pudgy individual could never
make a great romantic fiction like _Solway Moss_, by De Vere."

"But that is a superb head," whispered Miss Moyne, "the head of a
master, a genius."

"Oh, there are heads and heads, genius and genius," replied Crane. "I
guess the new-comer off as a newspaper man from Chicago or New York. It
requires first-class genius to be a good reporter."

The stranger under discussion was now giving some directions to a porter
regarding his luggage. This he did with that peculiar readiness, or
sleight, so to call it, which belongs to none but the veteran traveler.
A moment later he came up the wooden steps of the hotel, cast a
comprehensive but apparently indifferent glance over the group of guests
and passed into the hall, where they heard him say to the boy in
waiting: "My room is 24."

"That is the reserved room," remarked two or three persons at once.

Great expectations hung about room 24; much guessing had been indulged
in considering who was to be the happy and exalted person chosen to
occupy it. Now he had arrived, an utter stranger to them all. Everybody
looked inquiry.

"Who can he be?"

"It must be Mark Twain," suggested little Mrs. Philpot, of Memphis.

"Oh, no; Mark Twain is tall, and very handsome; I know Mark," said
Crane.

"How strange!" ejaculated Miss Moyne, and when everybody laughed, she
colored a little and added hastily:

"I didn't mean that it was strange that Mr. Crane should know Mr. Twain,
but----"

They drowned her voice with their laughter and hand-clapping.

They were not always in this very light mood at Hotel Helicon, but just
now they all felt in a trivial vein. It was as if the new guest had
brought a breath of frivolous humor along with him and had blown it over
them as he passed by.

Room 24 was the choice one of Hotel Helicon. Every guest wanted it, on
account of its convenience, its size and the superb view its windows
afforded; but from the first it had been reserved for this favored
individual whose arrival added greater mystery to the matter.

As the sun disappeared behind the western mountains, and the great gulf
of the valley became a sea of purplish gloom, conversation clung in half
whispers to the subject who meantime was arraying himself in evening
dress for dinner, posing before the large mirror in room 24 and smiling
humorously at himself as one who, criticising his own foibles, still
holds to them with a fortitude almost Christian.

He parted his hair in the middle, but the line of division was very
slight, and he left a pretty, half-curled short wisp hanging over the
centre of his forehead. The wide collar that hid his short neck creased
his heavy well-turned jaws, giving to his chin the appearance of being
propped up. Although he was quite stout, his head was so broad and his
feet so small that he appeared to taper from top to toe in a way that
emphasized very forcibly his expression of blended dignity and jollity,
youth and middle age, sincerity and levity. When he had finished his
toilet, he sat down by the best window in the best room of Hotel
Helicon, and gazed out over the dusky valley to where a line of
quivering silver light played fantastically along the line of peaks that
notched the delicate blue of the evening sky. The breeze came in, cool
and sweet, with a sort of champagne sparkle in its freshness and purity.
It whetted his appetite and blew the dust of travel out of his mind. He
was glad when the dinner hour arrived.

The long table was nearly full when he went down, and he was given a
seat between Miss Moyne and little Mrs. Philpot. By that secret cerebral
trick we all know, but which none of us can explain, he was aware that
the company had just been discussing him. In fact, someone had ventured
to wonder if he were Mr. Howells, whereupon Mr. Crane had promptly said
that he knew Mr. Howells quite well, and that although in a general
way the new-comer was not unlike the famous realist, he was far from
identical with him.

Laurens Peck, the bushy-bearded New England critic, whispered in
someone's ear that it appeared as if Crane knew everybody, but that
the poet's lively imagination had aided him more than his eyes, in all
probability. "Fact is," said he, "a Kentuckian soon gets so that he
_thinks_ he has been everywhere and seen everybody, whether he has or
not."

Out of this remark grew a serious affair which it will be my duty to
record at the proper place.

Little Mrs. Philpot, who wore gold eye-glasses and had elongated dimples
in her cheeks and chin, dexterously managed to have a word or two with
the stranger, who smiled upon her graciously without attempting to enter
into a conversation. Miss Moyne fared a little better, for she had the
charm of grace and beauty to aid her, attended by one of those puffs
of good luck which come to none but the young and the beautiful. Mr.
B. Hobbs Lucas, a large and awkward historian from New York, knocked
over a bottle of claret with his elbow, and the liquor shot with an
