



Produced by Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






HOME LIFE

ON AN OSTRICH FARM.

[Illustration: TROOP OF OSTRICHES, AND CART WITH PRICKLY-PEAR
LEAVES FOR FOOD.]




HOME LIFE ON AN OSTRICH FARM


By

ANNIE MARTIN


_WITH TEN ILLUSTRATIONS_


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
1891

_Authorized Edition._




To T. M.

IN REMEMBRANCE OF OUR SOUTH AFRICAN LIFE.




PREFACE.


Some portions of the chapters on "Ostriches" and "Bobby" have already
appeared, in an abridged form, in the Saturday _Review_. Part of the
chapter on "The Climate of the Karroo" has also appeared in the _St.
James's Gazette_.

By the kind permission of the editors of both papers I am now enabled
to reprint these pages.

    A. M.




CONTENTS.


                                                                 PAGE

CHAPTER I.

PORT ELIZABETH AND WALMER.

Early ambitions realized--Voyage to South Africa--Cape Town
and Wynberg--Profusion of flowers--Port Elizabeth--Christmas
decorations--Public library--Malays--Walmer--Hottentot huts--Our
little house--Pretty gardens--Honey-suckers--Flowers of Walmer
Common--Wax-creeper--Ixias--Scarlet heath--Natal lilies--
"Upholstery flower"--Ticks--Commence ostrich-farming--Counting
the birds--A ride after an ostrich                                  9


CHAPTER II.

SOME OF OUR PETS.

Friendliness of South African birds and beasts--Our secretary
bird--Ungainly appearance of Jacob--His queer ways--Tragic fate of
a kitten--A persecuted fowl--Our Dikkops--A baby buffalo--Wounded
buffalo more dangerous than lion--A lucky stumble--Hunter attacked
by "rogue" buffalo--A midnight ride--Followed by a lion--Toto--A
pugnacious goose--South African climate dangerous to imported
dogs--Toto and the crows--Animals offered by Moors in exchange
for Toto                                                           25


CHAPTER III.

PLANTS OF THE KARROO.

We move up-country--Situation of farm--Strange vegetation of
Karroo district--Karroo plant--Fei-bosch--Brack-bosch--Our
flowers--Spekboom--Bitter aloes--Thorny plants--Wacht-een-Beetje
--Ostriches killed by prickly pear--Finger-poll--Wild tobacco
fatal to ostriches--Carelessness of colonists--Euphorbias--
Candle-bush                                                        46


CHAPTER IV.

OUR LITTLE HOME.

Building operations--A plucking--Ugliness of Cape houses--Our
rooms--Fountain in sitting-room a failure--Drowned pets--
Decoration of rooms--Colonist must be Jack-of-all-trades--Cape
waggons--Shooting expeditions--Strange tale told by Boer           61


CHAPTER V.

CLIMATE OF THE KARROO.

Cape Colony much abused--Healthy climate--Wonderful cures of
consumption--Karroo a good place for sanatorium--Rarity of illness
and accidents--The young colonist--An independent infant--Long
droughts--Hot winds--Dust storms--Dams--Advantage of possessing
good wells--Partiality of thunderstorms--Delights of a brack
roof--Washed out of bed--After the rain--Our horses--Effects of
rain indoors--_Opslaag_--The Cape winter--What to wear on Karroo
farms                                                              72


CHAPTER VI.

OSTRICHES.

An unwilling ride--First sight of an ostrich farm--Ridiculous
mistakes about ostriches--Decreased value of birds and feathers
--Chicks--Plumage of ostriches--A frightened ostrich--The
plucking-box--Sorting feathers--Voice of the ostrich--Savage
birds--"Not afraid of a dicky-bird!"--Quelling an ostrich--Birds
killed by men in self-defence--Nests--An undutiful hen--Darby and
Joan--A disconsolate widower--A hen-pecked husband--Too much
zeal--Jackie--Cooling the eggs--The white-necked crow--Poisoning
jackals--Ostrich eggs in the kitchen--A quaint old writer on
ostriches--A suppliant bird--Nest destroyed by enraged ostrich--An
old bachelor                                                       98


CHAPTER VII.

OSTRICHES (_continued_).

Vagaries of an incubator--Hatching the chicks--A bad egg--Human
foster mothers--Chicks difficult to rear--"Yellow-liver"--Cruel
boys--Chicks herded by hen ostrich--Visit to Boer's house--A
carriage full of ostriches--"The melancholy Jaques"--Ostriches at
sea--A stampede--Runaway birds--Branding--Stupidity of ostriches
--Accidents--Waltzing and fighting--Ostrich soup--An expensive
quince--A feathered Tantalus--Strange things swallowed by ostriches
--A court-martial--The ostrich, or the diamond?--A visit to the
Zoo                                                               130


CHAPTER VIII.

MEERKATS.

Meerkats plentiful in the Karroo--Their appearance--Intelligence--
Fearlessness--Friendship for dogs--A meerkat in England--Meerkat an
inveterate thief--An owl in Tangier--Taming full-grown meerkat--
Tiny twins--A sad accident--Different characters of meerkats--The
turkey-herd--Bob and the meerkat--"The Mouse"                     157


CHAPTER IX.

BOBBY.

Bobby's babyhood--Insatiable appetite--Variety of noises made by
Bobby--His tameness--Narrow escape from drowning--A warlike
head-gear--Bobby the worse for drink--His love of mischief--He
disarms his master--Meerkat persecuted by Bobby--Bobby takes to
dishonest ways--He becomes a prisoner--His clever tricks--Death
of Bobby                                                          170


CHAPTER X.

OUR SERVANTS.

A retrospective vision--Phillis in her domain--Her destructiveness
--Her ideas on personal adornment--The woes of a mistress--
Eye-service--Abrupt departure of Phillis--Left in the lurch--Nancy
and her successors--Cure of sham sickness--The thief's dose--Our
ostrich-herd--A bride purchased with cows--English and natives at
the Cape--Character of Zulus and Kaffirs                          182


CHAPTER XI.

HOW WE FARED.

Angora goats--Difficulty of keeping meat--The plague of flies--
Rations--Our store--Barter--Fowls--Chasing a dinner--Fowls
difficult to rear--Secretary birds as guardians of the poultry-yard
--Jacob in the Karroo--He comes down in the world--He dies--
Antelopes--A springbok hunt--The Queen's birthday in the
Karroo--Colonial dances--Our klipspringer--Superstition about
hares--Game birds--_Paauw_--_Knorhaan_--Namaqua partridges--
Porcupines--A short-lived pet--Indian corn--Stamped mealies--
Whole-meal bread--Plant used for making bread rise--Substitutes
for butter--_Priembesjes_--A useful tree--Wild honey--The
honey-bird--Enemies of bees--Moth in bees' nests--Good coffee
--Sour milk                                                       203


CHAPTER XII.

KARROO BEASTS, BIRDS AND REPTILES.

Leopard drowned in well--Baboons--Egyptian sacred animals on Cape
farms--"Adonis"--A humiliating retreat--A baby baboon--Clever
tricks performed by baboons--Adonis as a _Voorlooper_--A
four-handed pointsman--Sarah--A baboon at the Diamond Fields--
Adonis's shower-bath--His love of stimulants--His revengeful
disposition--Pelops the dog-headed--Horus--_Aasvogels_--
Goat-sucker--The butcher-bird's larder--Nest of the golden oriole
--The kapok-bird--Snakes in houses--A puff-adder under a pillow
--Puff-adder most dangerous of Cape snakes--Cobras--_Schaapsticker_
--Ugly house-lizards--Dassie-adder--The dassie the coney of
Scripture--Stung by a scorpion--Fight between tarantula and
centipede--Destructive ants--The _Aardvaark_, or ant-bear--
Ignominious flight of a sentry--Ant-lion--Walking-leaves--The
Hottentot god--A mantis at a picnic                               237


CHAPTER XIII.

OUR NEIGHBOURS.

Hospitality of Cape colonists--Cheating and jealousy in business
--Comfortless homes--Spoilt children--Education--The "Schoolmaster"
--Convent schools--A priest-ridden nation--The _Nachtmaal_--
Old French names--A South African duke in Paris--Fine-looking
men--Fat women--Ignorance of _Vrouws_--Boers unfriendly to
English--A mean man                                               266


CHAPTER XIV.

GOOD-BYE.

Recalled to England--Regrets and farewells--Cape horses lacking in
intelligence--"Old Martin"--A chapter of accidents--A horse "after
Velasquez"--The Spy's revenge--Virtues and faults of Cape horses--
Horse-sickness--Good-bye to Swaylands--Kaffir crane--The voyage
home--Dogs in durance--St. Helena--A visit to Longwood--Home
again                                                             277




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


   I. Troop of Ostriches and Cart, with Prickly-Pear Leaves for
food                                                   _Frontispiece._

  II. 1. Jacob. 2. Toto                              _Facing page_ 26

 III. Some of the best kinds of Ostrich-bush:--
      1. Brack-bosch.
      2. Ghanna.
      3. Fei-bosch.                                     "          48

  IV. Our Sitting-room                                  "          66

   V. Ostriches in a Hot Wind                           "          80

  VI. Ostrich-chicks                                    "         104

 VII. 1. Ostrich-chick (Photographed from case in Stanley
           and African Exhibition)
      2. Ostriches meditating Escape through defective
           fence                                        "         150

VIII. A Meerkat                                         "         158




HOME LIFE ON AN OSTRICH FARM.




CHAPTER I.

PORT ELIZABETH AND WALMER.

Early ambitions realized--Voyage to South Africa--Cape Town and
Wynberg--Profusion of flowers--Port Elizabeth--Christmas decorations
--Public library--Malays--Walmer--Hottentot huts--Our little house--
Pretty gardens--Honey-suckers--Flowers of Walmer Common--Wax-creeper
--Ixias--Scarlet heath--Natal lilies--"Upholstery flower"--Ticks--
Commence ostrich-farming--Counting the birds--A ride after an ostrich.


In the year 1881, leaving our native land wrapped in the cold fogs of
November, my husband and I started for South Africa; where it was the
intention of the former to resume the occupation of ostrich-farming,
engaged in which he had already spent many years in the Cape Colony. It
was my first visit to South Africa, and I was looking forward with
great pleasure to the realization of a very early wish; for the
adventures of settlers in far-off lands had always from childhood been
my favourite reading, and I had become firmly convinced that a colonial
life would suit me better than any other. Nor have I been disappointed;
but, looking back now on our life in South Africa, I can truthfully say
that, though certainly lacking in adventure, it has--unlike many things
long wished for and attained at last--in no way fallen short of my
expectations.

The few hours we spent at Madeira were unfortunately during the night;
and the beautiful island I was so longing to see remained hidden from
view in a most tantalizing manner, without even the moonlight to give
us some faint outline of its far-famed loveliness.

After a safe, but most uneventful voyage, enlivened by no more stirring
incidents than the occasional breaking down of the engines, we at last
looked up at the glories of Table Mountain, and came suddenly into
summer; enjoying the flowers and bright sunshine of Cape Town all the
more after the dreary weather we had left in England. We landed, and
spent a few very pleasant days at the pretty suburb of Wynberg, from
whence we took several beautiful drives. On one occasion we left the
carriage, and walked over such a carpet of lovely and bright-coloured
