



Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          PERCHANCE TO DREAM

                          By Richard Stockham

                       Illustrated by Kelly Freas

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from IF Worlds of Science
Fiction May 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _If you wish to escape, if you would go to faraway places,
then go to sleep and dream. For sometimes that is the only way...._]


All along the line of machines, the men's hands and arms worked like the
legs of spiders spinning a web. They wound wire and hammered bolts, tied
knots and welded pieces of steel and fitted gears. They did not look at
each other or sing or whistle or talk or laugh.

And then--he made a mistake.

Instantly he stepped back and a trouble shooter moved into his place.
The trouble shooter's hands flew over the controls.

The trouble shooter finished and the workman took his place. His arms
moved ceaselessly again.

He was a tall man, slim and wiry, his dress identical to that of the
others--grey coveralls that fit like tights.

Suddenly a red light flashed in his eyes and he began to tremble. He
took two steps backward. The trouble shooter moved into the empty space.

The man stood for a moment, like a soldier at attention, turned and
walked smartly toward the mouth of a corridor.

The silence was like a motion picture with a dead sound track. There was
only motion--and him walking down the line of machines where the hands
reached out, working, working.

In the corridor now, he looked straight ahead, marching. The walls
glowed like water beneath a shallow sea.

He raised his arm, felt the door strike and the heel of his hand; felt
it swing open; saw the desk suspended from the ceiling by luminous,
silver chains.

A man with a massive, white-maned head and a pink, smiling face rose
from behind the desk. His suit was like that of a general.

"Well, Twenty-three." The Superfather stared down at the dossier on his
desk. "Two mistakes in three months. Too bad. Just when you were on your
way to the head of the machine room."

"I don't know what's the matter with me," said Twenty-three.

"I'm afraid we'll have to drop you back to a less responsible position."

"Of course."

The Superfather looked up quickly. "You accept this? No depression? No
threat of suicide?... You _are_ in bad shape." He handed a packet of
cards to Twenty-three. "Put these in your dream machine tonight. Go to
your new job tomorrow."

Twenty-three stood motionless, staring over the other man's shoulder.

The Superfather sat down. "Tell me about the dreams you have when you
don't use the machine."

Twenty-three made a quick decision. He couldn't tell him he didn't use
the standard dream cards anymore. And he certainly couldn't tell about
the _other_ dream cards he'd been getting from the little man he'd met
on the street. He'd simply answer the factual truth to the question that
had been asked.

"Well," he said, as though he were confessing a crime. "I dream I'm
walking in the city. It's dark. I feel like I've got to find something.
I don't know what. But the feeling's very strong. All of a sudden I
notice the city's empty. There're just buildings and streets and a faint
glow of light. And it comes to me that everybody's dead and buried. Then
I know what I'm looking for. I've got to find something alive or I'll
die too. So I start running around, in and out buildings, up and down
streets. But there's nothing. I'm breathing so hard I think my heart's
going to burst. Finally I fall down. I feel myself beginning to die. I
try to get up but I can't! I try to yell! I've got no voice! I'm so
afraid, I can't stand it! Then I wake up."

The Superfather frowned. "Incredible. Several other cases like yours
have turned up in the last month. We're working on them. But yours is
the worst yet. You had such high capabilities. Your tests showed, when
you first began to work, ten years ago, that you were capable of going
to the head of your production line. But you're not doing it. Also your
normal dreams should correspond to the ones on the cards. And they
don't.... Are you using the standard cards every other night?"

Twenty-three lied. "Yes."

"And the nights you don't use them, you have a dream like the one you
just told me."

"That's right."

"Incredible." The Superfather shook his head. "It just doesn't add up.
As you know, you get the prescribed dreams every other night and that's
supposed to condition your mind to dreaming those same dreams, by
itself, on the nights you don't use the machine. The prescribed dreams
merely show you the true way of life. And when you're on your own you're
supposed to follow that way of life whether you're asleep or awake.
That's what the dream machine is for. I'm sure you're aware of all
this?"

"Yes," said Twenty-three. "Yes."

"Now we Superfathers _never_ have to use the dream machines. We're so
filled with the way of life they advocate and it's become such an
integral part of us, we simply _are_ what our prescribed dreams are. And
the more successful a person is in the city, the less he has to use the
dream machine. Now you have to use it every other night. That's entirely
too much for a man of your potential. You realize this, of course.

"Oh I do," said Twenty-three shaking his head sadly.

"Well now," said the Superfather, "that means something's wrong. _Very_
wrong." He rubbed his chin, thinking. "Your prescribed dreams show you
working faster and faster on the machines, going on month after month
year after year, with one hundred percent accuracy. They show you happy
in your work, driven by ambition on up to the end of your capabilities.
They show you contented there to the end of your working life." He
paused. "And you're _doing_ just the opposite ... I suppose your wife
is--concerned?"

Twenty-three nodded.

"After all, the marriage center assured her your index was right for
her. _Her_ sleep cards were coordinated with yours. The normal dreams of
both of you, without the machine, should be identical.... Yet you come
up with this horror--running through the city, alone, falling, dying."

Twenty-three's mouth twitched.

"Well." The Superfather stood. "If you can't adjust to normal, we'll
simply have to send you to the pre-frontal lobotomy men. You wouldn't
want that."

"Oh no!"

"Good!" The Superfather held out another packet of cards. "Use these
_tomorrow_ night. It's a concentration pattern which should be dense
enough to make you dream of being, well--perhaps even President, eh?"

"Yes." Twenty-three hesitated.

"Well?" said the Superfather.

"I'd--like to ask a question."

The Superfather nodded.

"What--what use," went on Twenty-three, "is all this--work being put
to--that we do--along the machine lines--every day? We don't, seem to
really be _making_ anything. Just working."

The Superfather's eyes narrowed. "You're kept busy. You get paid. You
live. The city is here. That's all. That's enough."

"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir." Twenty-three turned abruptly, marched to the
door and stepped into the empty, silent corridor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-three looked up at the glowing dome of the city that curved away
to the horizon. He wondered if there really was a white ball beyond it
sometimes and tiny dots of light, set in blue black. And at other times
did a ball of fire flame up there, giving light and heat and life? And
if there was this life and light up there, _why_ the great dome over the
city? _Why_ the factories and machine lines replacing it section after
section, generation after generation? The slabs that the workers fused
together this year and the next and the next, pushing back this life and
light and heat. Why not let it pour down into the city and warm all the
people? Why not go to the space out there and the depth and freedom? Why
this great shell that closed them away? For the sake of the Superfathers
maybe? And the Superfathers-plus? For the sake of the ones, like himself
maybe who worked and built? For the sake of them, so they wouldn't
become dangerous maybe and tear the great wall down and rush out into
whatever was beyond? Why else?

But it could be all a farce. They could all be working in the great dome
because they didn't know what was beyond. Who could know if they'd never
been beyond?

And so they were held under the domes with the buildings and the
machines that carried them all around in the city; held with the
plumbing and the theatres and all the intricate mechanisms that spoke to
them and fed them, that washed them and poured thoughts into their
minds, that healed them when they were sick and rested them when they
were tired. The same as they were held with the great dome. Held and
shackeled with the replacing of parts that didn't need replacing; the
making over and over again of the tiny and large pieces of the
mechanisms and the taking of the old mechanisms and the melting of them
or smashing of them to powder so that this dust or molten metal could be
fashioned again and again into the same pieces that they had been for so
many thousands of years. All this to keep them busy? All this to keep
something outside that was supposed to be destructive because once it
had been so five thousand years ago or ten or fifty? All this because
that was the way it had been for as long as the hundreds and the
thousands of years that history had been recorded?

He walked on through the silence, dimly aware now of the people moving
about him, of the automobiles rolling past, as though moved by some
invisible force. He passed row upon row of movie theatres that called to
him with invisible vibrations. He turned away.

Where was the little man?

He stopped, moving only his eyes. After a moment, he saw the little man
step out of a shop-front and stand waiting. Twenty-three, a cigarette in
his mouth, walked over and asked for a light. The little man touched a
lighter to the cigarette, at the same time dropping a packet of cards
into Twenty-three's pocket.

Twenty-three moved on. He felt the pounding of his heart. If only his
wife were asleep so he would not have to wait to look at these new
cards.

As he walked, his thoughts cried out against the silence. He glanced
suspiciously from side to side. If only he could hear the sounds of the
city. But except for human voices and music, the city had always been
silent. The human voices spoke only words written by the Superfathers,
and the music came from records that had been composed by them--all this
back when the city had first come into being. Other than these sounds
there could be only the quiet all around. No chugging motors or scraping
footsteps. No crashing engines in the sky, or pounding of steel on
stone. No shrieking of factory whistles or clanging steeple bells or
honking automobile horns. None of this to pluck and pound at nerves, to
suggest that this place was not the most soothing and gentle of all
places to be in. There were no winds to swirl and moan away into the
distance. The chirp of birds had long since been stilled, and so had the
patter of rain and the crash of thunder. There must not be any of these
sounds either to lure the imagination into some distance where danger
and excitement might be waiting.

Now he was walking toward the door of his apartment house. It swung
open. Thirty seconds later he stopped before another door. It too swung
open.

His wife stood in the middle of the room, between two traveling bags. He
moved slowly toward her and stopped just out of arm's reach.

"What's this?" He gestured toward the bags. "Where're you going?"

She stared at him for a long moment, her face set. She was of his height
and build and wore a suit the same light grey as his. Their hair cuts
were identical, their faces sharp featured and pale. They might have
been brother and sister--or two brothers, or two sisters.

"I'm going to the marriage center."

"What for?" He had tried to inject surprise into his voice. But the tone
was listless.

"The Superfather called about your dream."

Twenty-three turned away, lighted a cigarette. He should beg her to
stay, should promise to change. But the silence was in him, like a
sickness.

"A terrible thing's happening to you. I don't want any part of it." She
picked up the bags. "When you come to your senses, you know where to
reach me.... _If_ I haven't already made another contract, I _might_
come back to you."

She hesitated at the door.

"There's one thing I don't understand. You haven't begged me to stay.
You haven't broken down. You haven't threatened suicide." She paused.
"It's standard procedure, you know. It might even make me decide to wait
awhile."

"I don't want you to stay," he said. He felt a shock of surprise. It was
as though a voice had spoken from behind him.

He watched the door shut between them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dressed in his pajamas, he stood beside the metal tube, in which for so
many years he had slept his regulation sleep and dreamed his regulation
dreams. There was something of the finely made casket about this
tube--the six foot length and three foot diameter; the lid along its top
and the dull shine of the metal and the quiet of it, as though it were
asleep and lying in wait for a tired body to bring it awake so that it
could put the body to sleep and live in the dreams it would give to the
sleeper.

Beside his own tube stood its twin, where his wife had also slept and
dreamed through the years.

Leaning slightly forward, he felt the press of metal against his hip
bones, felt the tube roll an inch with his weight. He rested one hand on
the metal top, felt its warmth and smoothness, was aware of its
cleanness, like that of a surgical instrument.

Now he glanced at the glistening black panel that stood two feet high at
the tube's head; quickly checked its four illuminated dials and three
gleaming arrows and at the same time raised his hand to drop the cards
into the softly glowing slot at the panel's top.

Suddenly his hand stopped.

He bent forward.

What was this? A feeling of strangeness. Vague. Like sensing some subtle
change in a picture that has hung for twenty years above the fireplace
in one's home.

He drew closer, squinting. The dials and meters seemed to be the same as
they had yesterday and the day before and the year before.

And yet?

The dials. Larger? By a fraction? And the tiny gleaming arrows of the
meters. Barely longer? And the marks on the dials and meters? One extra
each, very faintly, like a piece of hair.
