



Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: "SHE WISHED ME TO SUGGEST SOMETHING FOR HER TO DO" [See
page 56]]




"CHARGE IT"

OR

KEEPING UP WITH HARRY

A story of fashionable extravagance and of the
successful efforts to restrain it made
by The Honorable Socrates Potter
the genial friend of Lizzie

BY

IRVING BACHELLER

ILLUSTRATED

HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK AND LONDON

MCMXII




Books by

IRVING BACHELLER

 Charge It. Ill'd. 12mo                         net $1.00
 Keeping Up With Lizzie. Ill'd. Post 8vo         net 1.00
 Eben Holden. Ill'd. Post 8vo                        1.50
                                Edition de Luxe      2.00
 Eben Holden's Last Day A-Fishing. 16mo               .50
 Dri and I. Ill'd. Post 8vo                          1.50
 Darrell of the Blessed Isles. Ill'd. Post 8vo       1.50
 Vergilius. Post 8vo                                 1.35
 Silas Strong. Post 8vo                              1.50
 The Hand-Made Gentleman. Post 8vo                   1.50
 In Various Moods. Poems. Post 8vo               net 1.00

HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK

COPYRIGHT, 1912. BY HARPER & BROTHERS

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

PUBLISHED SEPTEMBER, 1912

K-M




TO MY DEAR FRIEND

LEDYARD PARK HALE

ANOTHER HONEST LAWYER




CONTENTS

 CHAP.                                                            PAGE
    I. In Which Harry Swiftly Passes from One Stage of His
           Career to Another                                         1
   II. Which Begins the Story of the Bishop's Head                  11
  III. Which Is the Story of the Pimpled Queen and the Black
           Spot                                                     33
   IV. In Which Socrates Encounters "New Thought" and
           Psychological Hair                                       45
    V. In Which Socrates Discusses the Over-Production of Talk      55
   VI. In Which Betsey Commits an Indiscretion                      69
  VII. In Which Socrates Attacks the Worst Doers and Best
           Sellers                                                  75
 VIII. In Which Socrates Attacks the Helmet and the Battle-Ax       84
   IX. In Which Socrates Increases the Supply of Splendor           91
    X. In Which Socrates Breaks the Drag and Tandem Monopoly in
           Pointview                                                99
   XI. In Which Sundry People Make Great Discoveries               106
  XII. In Which Harry Is Forced to Abandon Swamp Fiction and
           Like Follies and to Study the Geography and Natives
           of a Land Unknown to Our Heiristocracy                  118
 XIII. In Which the Minister Gets Into Love and Trouble            127
  XIV. In Which Socrates Discovers a New Folly                     139
   XV. In Which Harry Returns to Pointview and Goes to Work        148
  XVI. Which Presents an Incident in Our Campaign Against New
           New England                                             171
 XVII. Which Presents a Decisive Incident in Our Campaign
           Against Old New England                                 176




ILLUSTRATIONS

 "SHE WISHED ME TO SUGGEST SOMETHING FOR HER TO DO"       Frontispiece
 "WHAT DIDN'T THEY SAY? THEY FLEW AT ME LIKE WILDCATS."             60
 "'IT'S THE VAN ALSTYNE CREST,' I SAID. 'IT'S A PROOF OF
     RESPECTABILITY.'"                                              86
 "RADIANT IN SILK, LACE, DIAMONDS, PEARLS, AND RUBIES"              94
 "HARRY'S PET COLLIE HAD COME UP TO THE BACK DOOR WITH A
     HUMAN SKULL IN HIS MOUTH"                                     148
 "HE LOOKED LIKE A MAN WITH A WOODEN LEG"                          188




FOREWORD


It may interest, if it does not comfort, the reader to know that
this little story is built upon facts. The ride of Harry, the
hundred-dollar pimple, the psychological hair, the downfall of Roger,
all happened, while the Bishop's Head is one of the possessions of a
New England family.

                                                             I. B.




"CHARGE IT"

I

IN WHICH HARRY SWIFTLY PASSES FROM ONE STAGE OF HIS CAREER TO ANOTHER


"Harry and I were waiting for his motor-car," said the Honorable
Socrates Potter. "He couldn't stand and wait--that would be
losing time--so we kept busy. Went into the stores and bought
things--violets, candy, golf-balls, tennis-shoes, new gloves, and
neckties. Harry didn't need 'em, but he couldn't waste any time
and--

"'There's the car!'

"In each store Harry had used the magic words, 'Charge it,' and passed
on.

"We were going over to Chesterville to settle with the contractor who
had built his father's house. We had an hour and four minutes in which
to do it all, and then--the 6.03 express for New York. Harry had to
get it to be in time for a bridge party.

"We climbed in. Harry grabbed the wheel. The gas-lever purred, the
gears clicked, the car jumped into motion and rushed, screeching, up
the hill ahead of us, shot between a trolley-car and a wagon, swung
around a noisy runabout, scared a team into the siding, and sped
away.

"The town behind us! Country-houses on either side! A bulldog in the
near perspective! He set himself, made a rush at us, as if trying to
grab a wheel off the car, and the wheel got him. We flushed a lot of
chickens. The air seemed to be full of them. Harry waved an apology to
the farmer, as if to say:

"'Never mind, sir, I'm in a hurry now. Take my number and charge
it.'

"'He struck a fowl, and, turning, I saw a whirl of feathers in the air
behind us and the farmer's fist waving above the dust.

"Harry would have paid for the dog and the fowl in money but not in
time--not even in a second of time! Harry had an engagement for a
bridge party and must catch the 6.03 express.

"A man on a bicycle followed by a big greyhound was just ahead. We
screeched. The man went into the ditch and took a header. The
greyhound didn't have time to turn out then. He bent to the oars until
he had gained lead enough to save himself with a sidelong jump into
the buttercups.

"'Charge it!'

"The needle on the speedometer wavered from fifty to fifty-five, then
struck at sixty, held a second there, and passed it. Gnats and flies
hit my face and stung like flying shot. The top of the road went up in
a swirl of dust behind us. I hung on, with my life in my trembling
hands. We zipped past teams and motor-cars.

"We filled every eye with dust and every ear with screeches and every
heart with a swift pang of terror.

"'Charge it!'

"A rider with a frightened horse raced on ahead of us to the next
corner. We sped across the track into Chesterville and--

"'Hold up! There's the office ahead.'

"The levers move, down goes the brake, and we're there.

"'Eleven miles in fourteen minutes!' Harry exclaims, as I spring out
and hurry to the door. It was really sixteen minutes, but I always
allow Harry a slight discount.

"'Not in!' I shout, in a second.

"'Not in--heart of Allah!--where is he?'

"'At the Wilton job on the point.'

"'We'll go get him.'

"'You go; I'll wait here.'

"Away he rushes--I thank God for the brief respite. This high power
encourages great familiarity with the higher powers. But the Creator's
name is used here in no light or profane spirit, let me say. In each
case it is only a brief prayer or, rather, the beginning of a prayer
which one has not time to finish. It is cut short by a new adventure.

"I say to myself that I shall not ride back with Harry. No, life is
still dear to me. I will take the trolley. And yet--what thrilling,
Jove-like, superhuman deviltry it was! I light a cigar and sit down.
Harry and Wilton arrive. Fifteen minutes gone!

"I get down to business.

"Harry says: 'Please cut it short.'

"I could have saved five hundred dollars if I had had time to present
our side of the case with proper deliberation. But Harry keeps
shouting:

"'Do cut it short. I _must_ get there--don't you know?'

"Wilton must have his pay, too--he needs every cent of it to-morrow.

"'You go on. I'll stay here and settle this matter and go home by the
trolley.'

"'Let's stick together,' my young friend entreats. 'Please hurry it
through and come on with me. I need you.'

"Harry must have company. His time is wasted unless he has a
spectator--an audience--a witness--a historian. Without that, all his
hair-breadth escapes would be thrown away. His stories would hang by a
thread.

"'We've only twenty-one minutes,' he calls.

"I say to myself: 'Damn the man whose money is like water and whose
time is more precious than the last hour of Mahomet.' Well, of course,
there was plenty of money, but the supply of time was limited. To
waste a second was to lose an opportunity for self-indulgence.

"I draw a check and take a hurried receipt and jump in.

"Away we go. 'Look out!'

"The brakes grind, and we rise in the air a little as a small boy
crosses our bows. We just missed him--thank God!

"'Don't be reckless, old man--go a bit slower.'

"'It's all right. We've a clear road now.'

"What a wind in our faces! There's the track ahead.

"'_Look out! The train! God Almighty!_'

"I spoke too late. We were almost up to the rails when I saw it. We
couldn't stop. Cleared the track in time. Felt the wind of the engine
in my back hair, and then my scalp moved. Just ahead was a light buggy
in the middle of the road and a bull, frightened by the cars,
galloping beside it.

"In the excitement Harry hadn't time to blow, and the roar of the
train had covered our noise. The bull turned into the ditch and
speeded up. We swerved between bull and buggy and grazed the side of
the latter.

"I jumped and landed on the bull, and that saved me. It's the first
time that I ever knocked a bull down. He got to his feet swiftly
beside me, bellowed, and took the fence. He was a fat, well-fed bull
with a big, round, soft side on him. I never knew that a bull was so
mellow. My feet sank deep, and he gave way, and I hit him again with
another part of my person. I didn't mean it, and felt for him,
although it is likely that his feelings needed no further help from
me. Of course I bounded off him at last and the earth hit me a hard
upper-cut, but the bull had been a highly successful shock absorber.
In a second or so I was able to get up and look around. The buggy had
gone over, and the horse was on his hind legs trying to climb out of
the dust-cloud.

"Harry stopped his car and began to back up.

"'That'll do for me,' I said. 'I don't sit in your padded cell any
longer.'

"I had lived a whole three-volume novel in the last forty minutes. The
Panama Canal had been finished and England had become a republic. It
was too much.

"We found two men--one at the head of the frightened horse, the other
lying beside the wrecked buggy with a broken leg.

"And Harry had an engagement to play bridge!

"I took the horse's head. The well man pulled a stake off the fence
and chased Harry around the motor-car. He didn't intend to 'charge
it.' Wanted cash down. I got hold of his arm and succeeded in calming
him.

"Harry apologized and assured them that he was willing to pay the
damage. We picked up the injured man and took him to his home. On the
way Harry explained that they should keep track of all expenses and:

"'Charge it.'

"In a few minutes Harry roared off in the direction of Pointview to
get a doctor and the 6.03 express.

"'It might be a little late,' he said, as he left us.

"The next day Harry was arrested as a public enemy for criminal
carelessness. He had injured three men on the highways of Connecticut,
to say nothing of dogs and poultry. Almost everybody had something
