

E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 15608-h.htm or 15608-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/6/0/15608/15608-h/15608-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/6/0/15608/15608-h.zip)





IN THE DAYS OF POOR RICHARD

by

IRVING BACHELLER

Author of _The Light in The Clearing_, _A Man for the Ages_, etc.

Illustrated by John Wolcott Adams

Indianapolis
The Bobbs-Merrill Company
Publishers
Press Of Braunworth & Co
Book Manufacturers
Brooklyn, N. Y.

1922







[Frontispiece: A young John Irons and Margaret Hare in the forest.]





TO MY FRIEND

ALBERT J. BEVERIDGE

Discerning Student and Interpreter of the Spirit of the Prophets, the
Struggle of the Heroes and the Wisdom of the Founders of Democracy, I
Dedicate This Volume.




FOREWORD

Much of the color of the love-tale of Jack and Margaret, which is a
part of the greater love-story of man and liberty, is derived from old
letters, diaries, and newspaper clippings in the possession of a
well-known American family.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

BOOK ONE

      I  The Horse Valley Adventure
     II  Sowing the Dragon's Teeth
    III  The Journey to Philadelphia
     IV  The Crossing
      V  Jack Sees London and the Great Philosopher
     VI  The Lovers
    VII  The Dawn
   VIII  An Appointment and a Challenge
     IX  The Encounter
      X  The Lady of the Hidden Face
     XI  The Departure
    XII  The Friend and the Girl He Left Behind Him


BOOK TWO

   XIII  The Ferment
    XIV  Adventures in the Service of the Commander-in-Chief
     XV  In Boston Jail
    XVI  Jack and Solomon Meet the Great Ally
   XVII  With the Army and in the Bush
  XVIII  How Solomon Shifted the Skeer
    XIX  The Voice of a Woman Sobbing
     XX  The First Fourth of July
    XXI  The Ambush
   XXII  The Binkussing of Colonel Burley
  XXIII  The Greatest Trait of a Great Commander


BOOK THREE

   XXIV  In France with Franklin
    XXV  The Pageant
   XXVI  In Which Appears the Horse of Destiny and
         the Judas of Washington's Army
  XXVII  Which Contains the Adventures of Solomon
         in the Timber Sack and on the "Hand-made River"
 XXVIII  In Which Arnold and Henry Thornhill Arrive
         in the Highlands
   XXIX  Love and Treason
    XXX  "Who Is She that Looketh Forth as the
         Morning, Fair as the Moon, Clear as the Sun,
         and Terrible as an Army with Banners?"
   XXXI  The Lovers and Solomon's Last Fight





BOOK ONE

CHAPTER I

THE HORSE VALLEY ADVENTURE

"The first time I saw the boy, Jack Irons, he was about nine years old.
I was in Sir William Johnson's camp of magnificent Mohawk warriors at
Albany.  Jack was so active and successful in the games, between the
red boys and the white, that the Indians called him 'Boiling Water.'
His laugh and tireless spirit reminded me of a mountain brook.  There
was no lad, near his age, who could run so fast, or jump so far, or
shoot so well with the bow or the rifle.  I carried him on my back to
his home, he urging me on as if I had been a battle horse and when we
were come to the house, he ran about doing his chores.  I helped him,
and, our work accomplished, we went down to the river for a swim, and
to my surprise, I found him a well taught fish.  We became friends and
always when I have thought of him, the words Happy Face have come to
me.  It was, I think, a better nickname than 'Boiling Water,' although
there was much propriety in the latter.  I knew that his energy given
to labor would accomplish much and when I left him, I repeated the
words which my father had often quoted in my hearing:

"'Seest thou a man diligent in his calling?  He shall stand before
kings.'"

This glimpse of John Irons, Jr.--familiarly known as Jack Irons--is
from a letter of Benjamin Franklin to his wife.

Nothing further is recorded of his boyhood until, about eight years
later, what was known as the "Horse Valley Adventure" occurred.  A full
account of it follows with due regard for background and color:

"It was the season o' the great moon," said old Solomon Binkus, scout
and interpreter, as he leaned over the camp-fire and flicked a coal out
of the ashes with his forefinger and twiddled it up to his pipe bowl.
In the army he was known as "old Solomon Binkus," not by reason of his
age, for he was only about thirty-eight, but as a mark of deference.
Those who followed him in the bush had a faith in his wisdom that was
childlike.  "I had had my feet in a pair o' sieves walkin' the white
sea a fortnight," he went on.  "The dry water were six foot on the
level, er mebbe more, an' some o' the waves up to the tree-tops, an'
nobody with me but this 'ere ol' Marier Jane [his rifle] the hull trip
to the Swegache country.  Gol' ding my pictur'!  It seemed as if the
wind were a-tryin' fer to rub it off the slate.  It were a pesky wind
that kep' a-cuffin' me an' whistlin' in the briers on my face an'
crackin' my coat-tails.  I were lonesome--lonesomer'n a he-bear--an'
the cold grabbin' holt o' all ends o' me so as I had to stop an' argue
'bout whar my bound'ry-lines was located like I were York State.  Cat's
blood an' gun-powder!  I had to kick an' scratch to keep my nose an'
toes from gittin'--brittle."

At this point, Solomon Binkus paused to give his words a chance "to
sink in."  The silence which followed was broken only by the crack of
burning faggots and the sound of the night wind in the tall pines above
the gorge.  Before Mr. Binkus resumes his narrative, which, one might
know by the tilt of his head and the look of his wide open, right eye,
would soon happen, the historian seizes the opportunity of finishing
his introduction.  He had been the best scout in the army of Sir
Jeffrey Amherst.  As a small boy he had been captured by the Senecas
and held in the tribe a year and two months.  Early in the French and
Indian War, he had been caught by Algonquins and tied to a tree and
tortured by hatchet throwers until rescued by a French captain.  After
that his opinion of Indians had been, probably, a bit colored by
prejudice.  Still later he had been a harpooner in a whale boat, and in
his young manhood, one of those who had escaped the infamous massacre
at Fort William Henry when English forces, having been captured and
disarmed, were turned loose and set upon by the savages.  He was a
tall, brawny, broad-shouldered, homely-faced man of thirty-eight with a
Roman nose and a prominent chin underscored by a short sandy throat
beard.  Some of the adventures had put their mark upon his weathered
face, shaven generally once a week above the chin.  The top of his left
ear was missing.  There was a long scar upon his forehead.  These were
like the notches on the stock of his rifle.  They were a sign of the
stories of adventure to be found in that wary, watchful brain of his.

Johnson enjoyed his reports on account of their humor and color and he
describes him in a letter to Putnam as a man who "when he is much
interested, looks as if he were taking aim with his rifle."  To some it
seemed that one eye of Mr. Binkus was often drawing conclusions while
the other was engaged with the no less important function of discovery.

His companion was young Jack Irons--a big lad of seventeen, who lived
in a fertile valley some fifty miles northwest of Fort Stanwix, in
Tryon County, New York.  Now, in September, 1768, they were traveling
ahead of a band of Indians bent on mischief.  The latter, a few days
before, had come down Lake Ontario and were out in the bush somewhere
between the lake and the new settlement in Horse Valley.  Solomon
thought that they were probably Hurons, since they, being discontented
with the treaty made by the French, had again taken the war-path.  This
invasion, however, was a wholly unexpected bit of audacity.  They had
two captives--the wife and daughter of Colonel Hare, who had been
spending a few weeks with Major Duncan and his Fifty-Fifth Regiment, at
Oswego.  The colonel had taken these ladies of his family on a hunting
trip in the bush.  They had had two guides with them, one of whom was
Solomon Binkus.  The men had gone out in the early evening after moose
and imprudently left the ladies in camp, where the latter had been
captured.  Having returned, the scout knew that the only possible
explanation for the absence of the ladies was Indians, although no
peril could have been more unexpected.  He had discovered by "the sign"
that it was a large band traveling eastward.  He had set out by night
to get ahead of them while Hare and his other guide started for the
fort.  Binkus knew every mile of the wilderness and had canoes hidden
near its bigger waters.  He had crossed the lake on which his party had
been camping, and the swamp at the east end of it and was soon far
ahead of the marauders.  A little after daylight, he had picked up the
boy, Jack Irons, at a hunting camp on Big Deer Creek, as it was then
called, and the two had set out together to warn the people in Horse
Valley, where Jack lived, and to get help for a battle with the savages.

It will be seen by his words that Mr. Binkus was a man of imagination,
but--again he is talking.

"I were on my way to a big Injun Pow-wow at Swegache fer Sir Bill--ayes
it were in Feb'uary, the time o' the great moon o' the hard snow.  Now
they be some good things 'bout Injuns but, like young brats, they take
natural to deviltry.  Ye may have my hide fer sole luther if ye ketch
me in an Injun village with a load o' fire-water.  Some Injuns is
smart, an' gol ding their pictur's! they kin talk like a cat-bird.  A
skunk has a han'some coat an' acts as cute as a kitten but all the
same, which thar ain't no doubt o' it, his friendship ain't wuth a dam.
It's a kind o' p'ison.  Injuns is like skunks, if ye trust 'em they'll
sp'ile ye.  They eat like beasts an' think like beasts, an' live like
beasts, an' talk like angels.  Paint an' bear's grease, an' squaw-fun,
an' fur, an' wampum, an' meat, an' rum, is all they think on.  I've et
their vittles many a time an' I'm obleeged to tell ye it's hard work.
Too much hair in the stew!  They stick their paws in the pot an' grab
out a chunk an' chaw it an' bolt it, like a dog, an' wipe their hands
on their long hair.  They brag 'bout the power o' their jaws, which I
ain't denyin' is consid'able, havin' had an ol' buck bite off the top
o' my left ear when I were tied fast to a tree which--you hear to
me--is a good time to learn Injun language 'cause ye pay 'tention
clost.  They ain't got no heart er no mercy.  How they kin grind up a
captive, like wheat in the millstuns, an' laugh, an' whoop at the sight
o' his blood!  Er turn him into smoke an' ashes while they look on an'
laugh--by mighty!--like he were singin' a funny song.  They'd be men
an' women only they ain't got the works in 'em.  Suthin' missin'.  By
the hide an' horns o' the devil!  I ain't got no kind o' patience with
them mush hearts who say that Ameriky belongs to the noble red man an'
that the whites have no right to bargain fer his land.  Gol ding their
pictur's!  Ye might as well say that we hain't no right in the woods
'cause a lot o' bears an' painters got there fust, which I ain't
a-sayin' but what bears an' painters has their rights."

Mr. Binkus paused again to put another coal on his pipe.  Then he
listened a moment and looked up at the rocks above their heads, for
they were camped in a cave at the mouth of which they had built a small
fire, in a deep gorge.  Presently he went on:

"I found a heap o' Injuns at Swegache--Mohawks, Senekys, Onandogs an'
Algonks.  They had been swappin' presents an' speeches with the French.
Just a little while afore they had had a bellerin' match with us 'bout
love an' friendship.  Then sudden-like they tuk it in their heads that
the French had a sharper hatchet than the English.  I were skeered, but
when I see that they was nobody drunk, I pushed right into the big
village an' asked fer the old Senecky chief Bear Face--knowin' he were
thar--an' said I had a letter from the Big Father.  They tuk me to him.

"I give him a chain o' wampum an' then read the letter from Sir Bill.
It offered the Six Nations more land an' a fort, an' a regiment to
defend 'em.  Then he give me a lot o' hedge-hog quills sewed on to
buckskin an' says he:

"'You are like a lone star in the night, my brother.  We have stretched
out our necks lookin' fer ye.  We thought the Big Father had forgot us.
Now we are happy.  To-morrer our faces will turn south an' shine with
bear's grease.'

"Sez I: 'You must wash no more in the same water with the French.  You
must return to The Long House.  The Big Father will throw his great arm
eround you.'

"I strutted up an' down, like a turkey gobbler, an' bellered out a lot
o' that high-falutin' gab.  I reckon I know how to shove an idee under
their hides.  Ye got to raise yer voice an' look solemn an' point at
the stars.  A powerful lot o' Injuns trailed back to Sir Bill, but they
was a few went over to the French.  I kind o' mistrust thar's some o'
them runnygades behind us.  They're 'spectin' to git a lot o' plunder
an' a horse apiece an' ride 'em back an' swim the river at the place o'
the many islands.  We'll poke down to the trail on the edge o' the
drownded lands afore sunrise an' I kind o' mistrust we'll see sign."

Jack Irons was a son of the much respected John Irons from New
Hampshire who, in the fertile valley where he had settled some years
before, was breeding horses for the army and sending them down to Sir
William Johnson.  Hence the site of his farm had been called Horse
Valley.

Mr. Binkus went to the near brook and repeatedly filled his old felt
hat with water and poured it on the fire.  "Don't never keep no fire
a-goin' a'ter I'm dried out," he whispered, as he stepped back into the
dark cave, "'cause ye never kin tell."

The boy was asleep on the bed of boughs.  Mr. Binkus covered him with
the blanket and lay down beside him and drew his coat over both.

"He'll learn that it ain't no fun to be a scout," he whispered with a
yawn and in a moment was snoring.

It was black dark when he roused his companion.  Solomon had been up
for ten minutes and had got their rations of bread and dried venison
out of his pack and brought a canteen of fresh water.

"The night has been dark.  A piece o' charcoal would 'a' made a white
mark on it," said Solomon.

"How do you know it's morning?" the boy asked as he rose, yawning.

"Don't ye hear that leetle bird up in the tree-top?" Solomon answered
