

E-text prepared by Rick Niles, Charlie Kirschner, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 14150-h.htm or 14150-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/1/5/14150/14150-h/14150-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/1/5/14150/14150-h.zip)





THE LIGHT IN THE CLEARING

A Tale of the North Country in the Time of Silas Wright

by

IRVING BACHELLER

Author of _Eben Holden_, _Keeping Up with Lizzie_, etc.

Illustrated by Arthur I. Keller.

1917







[Illustration: The Silent Woman stood, pointing at him with her finger]



_The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord_
                         --PROVERBS XX, 27


TO MY FRIEND

THOMAS R. PROCTOR, OF UTICA

LOVER OF THE TRUE IDEALS OF DEMOCRACY

WHOSE LIFE HAS BEEN A SHINING EXAMPLE TO ALL MEN OF WEALTH

HONORED GENTLEMAN AND PHILANTHROPIST

AT THE GATE OF THE LAND OF

WHICH I HAVE WRITTEN

DEDICATE THESE CHRONICLES OF THAT LAND

AND OF ITS GREAT HERO




FOREWORD


From the memoirs of one who knew Governor Wright and lived through many
of the adventures herein described and whose life ended full of honors
early in the present century. It is understood that he chose the name
Barton to signalize his affection for a friend well known in the land of
which he was writing.

THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE


The Light in the Clearing shone upon many things and mostly upon those
which, above all others, have impassioned and perpetuated the Spirit of
America and which, just now, seem to me to be worthy of attention. I
believe that spirit to be the very candle of the Lord which, in this
dark and windy night of time, has flickered so that the souls of the
faithful have been afraid. But let us be of good cheer. It is shining
brighter as I write and, under God, I believe it shall, by and by, be
seen and loved of all men.

One self-contained, Homeric figure, of the remote countryside in which I
was born, had the true Spirit of Democracy and shed its light abroad in
the Senate of the United States and the Capitol at Albany. He carried
the candle of the Lord. It led him to a height of self-forgetfulness
achieved by only two others--Washington and Lincoln. Yet I have been
surprised by the profound and general ignorance of this generation
regarding the career of Silas Wright, of whom Whittier wrote these
lines:

     "Man of the millions thou art lost too soon!
     Portents at which the bravest stand aghast
     The birth throes of a future strange and vast
     Alarm the land. Yet thou so wise and strong
     Suddenly summoned to the burial bed,
     Lapped in its slumbers deep and ever long,
     Hear'st not the tumult surging over head.
     Who now shall rally Freedom's scattering host?
     Who wear the mantle of the leader lost?"

The distinguished Senator who served at his side for many years, Thomas
H. Benton of Missouri, has this to say of Silas Wright in his _Thirty
Years' View_:

"He refused cabinet appointments under his fast friend Van Buren and
under Polk, whom he may be said to have elected. He refused a seat on
the bench of the Supreme Court of the United States; he rejected
instantly the nomination of 1844 for Vice-President; he refused to be
put in nomination for the Presidency. He spent that time in declining
office which others did in winning it. The offices he did accept, it
might well be said, were thrust upon him. He was born great and above
office and unwillingly descended to it."

So much by way of preparing the reader to meet the great commoner in
these pages. One thing more is necessary to a proper understanding of
the final scenes in the book--a part of his letter written to Judge Fine
just before the Baltimore convention of 1844, to wit:

"I do not feel at liberty to omit any act which may protect me from
being made the instrument, however honestly and innocently, of further
distractions.

"Within a few days several too partial friends have suggested to me the
idea that by possibility, in case the opposition to the nomination of
Mr. Van Buren should be found irreconcilable, a compromise might be made
by dropping him and using my name. I need not say to you that a consent
on my part to any such proceeding would justly forfeit my standing with
the democracy of our state and cause my faith and fidelity to my party
to be suspected everywhere.... To consent to the use of my name as a
candidate under any circumstances, would be in my view to invite you to
compromise the expressed wishes and instructions of your constituents
for my personal advancement. I can never consent to place myself in a
position where the suspicion of acting from such a motive can justly
attach to me....

"If it were proper I could tell you with the most perfect truth that I
have never been vain enough to dream of the office of President in
connection with my own name, and were not Mr. Van Buren the candidate of
our State, I should find just as little difficulty as I now do, in
telling you that I am not and can not under any circumstances be a
candidate before your convention for that office."

According to his best biographer, Jabez Hammond, Mr. Wright still
adhered to this high ground in spite of the fact that Mr. Van Buren
withdrew and requested his faithful hand to vote for the Senator.

There were those who accused Mr. Wright of being a spoilsman, the only
warrant for which claim would seem to be his remark in a letter: "When
our enemies accuse us of feeding our friends instead of them never let
them lie in telling the story."

He was, in fact, a human being, through and through, but so upright that
they used to say of him that he was "as honest as any man under heaven
or in it"

For my knowledge of the color and spirit of the time I am indebted to a
long course of reading in its books, newspapers and periodicals, notably
_The North American Review, The United States Magazine and Democratic
Review, The New York Mirror, The Knickerbocker, The St. Lawrence
Republican_, Benton's _Thirty Years' View_, Bancroft's _Life of Martin
Van Buren_, histories of Wright and his time by Hammond and Jenkins, and
to many manuscript letters of the distinguished commoner in the New York
Public Library and in the possession of Mr. Samuel Wright of Weybridge,
Vermont.

To any who may think that they discover portraits in these pages I
desire to say that all the characters--save only Silas Wright and
President Van Buren and Barton Baynes--are purely imaginary. However,
there were Grimshaws and Purvises and Binkses and Aunt Deels and Uncle
Peabodys in almost every rustic neighborhood those days, and I regret to
add that Roving Kate was on many roads. The case of Amos Grimshaw bears
a striking resemblance to that of young Bickford, executed long ago in
Malone, for the particulars of which case I am indebted to my friend,
Mr. H.L. Ives of Potsdam.

THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS


BOOK ONE

WHICH IS THE STORY OF THE CANDLE AND COMPASS

CHAPTER
    I The Melon Harvest
   II I Meet the Silent Woman and Silas Wright, Jr.
  III We Go to Meeting and See Mr. Wright Again
   IV Our Little Strange Companion
    V In the Light of the Candles
   VI The Great Stranger
  VII My Second Peril
 VIII My Third Peril


BOOK TWO

WHICH IS THE STORY OF THE PRINCIPAL WITNESS

   IX In Which I Meet Other Great Men
    X I Meet President Van Buren and Am Cross-Examined by Mr. Grimshaw
   XI A Party and--My Fourth Peril?
  XII The Spirit of Michael Henry and Others
 XIII The Thing and Other Things
  XIV The Bolt Falls


BOOK THREE

WHICH IS THE STORY OF THE CHOSEN WAYS

   XV Uncle Peabody's Way and Mine
  XVI I Use My Own Compass at a Fork in the Road
 XVII The Man with the Scythe
XVIII I Start in a Long Way
  XIX On the Summit
      Epilogue




BOOK ONE

Which is the Story of the Candle and the Compass



CHAPTER I

THE MELON HARVEST


Once upon a time I owned a watermelon. I say once because I never did it
again. When I got through owning that melon I never wanted another. The
time was 1831; I was a boy of seven and the melon was the first of all
my harvests. Every night and morning I watered and felt and surveyed my
watermelon. My pride grew with the melon and, by and by, my uncle tried
to express the extent and nature of my riches by calling me a
mellionaire.

I didn't know much about myself those days except the fact that my name
was Bart Baynes and, further, that I was an orphan who owned a
watermelon and a little spotted hen and lived on Rattle road in a
neighborhood called Lickitysplit. I lived with my Aunt Deel and my
Uncle Peabody Baynes on a farm. They were brother and sister--he about
thirty-eight and she a little beyond the far-distant goal of forty.

My father and mother died in a scourge of diphtheria that swept the
neighborhood when I was a boy of five. For a time my Aunt Deel seemed to
blame me for my loss.

"No wonder they're dead," she used to say, when out of patience with me
and--well I suppose that I must have had an unusual talent for all the
noisy arts of childhood when I broke the silence of that little home.

The word "dead" set the first mile-stone in the long stretch of my
memory. That was because I tried so hard to comprehend it and further
because it kept repeating its challenge to my imagination. I often
wondered just what had become of my father and mother and I remember
that the day after I went to my aunt's home a great idea came to me. It
came out of the old dinner-horn hanging in the shed. I knew the power of
its summons and I slyly captured the horn and marched around the house
blowing it and hoping that it would bring my father up from the fields.
I blew and blew and listened for that familiar halloo of his. When I
paused for a drink of water at the well my aunt came and seized the horn
and said it was no wonder they were dead. She knew nothing of the
sublime bit of necromancy she had interrupted--poor soul!

I knew that she had spoken of my parents for I supposed that they were
the only people in the world who were dead, but I did not know what it
meant to be dead. I often called to them, as I had been wont to do,
especially in the night, and shed many tears because they came no more
to answer me. Aunt Deel did not often refer directly to my talents, but
I saw, many times, that no-wonder-they-died look in her face.

Children are great rememberers. They are the recording angels--the
keepers of the book of life. Man forgets--how easily!--and easiest of
all, the solemn truth that children do _not_ forget.

A few days after I arrived in the home of my aunt and uncle I slyly
entered the parlor and climbed the what-not to examine some white
flowers on its top shelf and tipped the whole thing over, scattering its
burden of albums, wax flowers and sea shells on the floor. My aunt came
running on her tiptoes and exclaimed: "Mercy! Come right out o' here
this minute--you pest!"

I took some rather long steps going out which were due to the fact that
Aunt Deel had hold of my hand. While I sat weeping she went back into
the parlor and began to pick up things.

"My wreath! my wreath!" I heard her moaning.

How well I remember that little assemblage of flower ghosts in wax! They
had no more right to associate with human beings than the ghosts of
fable. Uncle Peabody used to call them the "Minervy flowers" because
they were a present from his Aunt Minerva. When Aunt Deel returned to
the kitchen where I sat--a sorrowing little refugee hunched up in a
corner--she said: "I'll have to tell your Uncle Peabody--ayes!"

"Oh please don't tell my Uncle Peabody," I wailed.

"Ayes! I'll have to tell him," she answered firmly.

For the first time I looked for him with dread at the window and when he
came I hid in a closet and heard that solemn and penetrating note in her
voice as she said:

"I guess you'll have to take that boy away--ayes!"

"What now?" he asked.

"My stars! he sneaked into the parlor and tipped over the what-not and
smashed that beautiful wax wreath!"

Her voice trembled.

"Not them Minervy flowers?" he asked in a tone of doleful incredulity.

"Ayes he did!"

