



Produced by Al Haines










Vergilius

A Tale of the Coming of Christ


By

Irving Bacheller





Author of

"Eben Holden" "D'ri and I" "Darrel of the Blessed Isles"





New York and London

Harper & Brothers Publishers

1904




Copyright, 1904, by IRVING BACHELLER.


All rights reserved.

Published August, 1904.




Vergilius

A Tale of the Coming of Christ




CHAPTER 1

Rome had passed the summits and stood looking into the dark valley of
fourteen hundred years.  Behind her the graves of Caesar and Sallust
and Cicero and Catullus and Vergil and Horace; before her centuries of
madness and treading down; round about her a multitude sickening of
luxury, their houses filled with spoil, their mouths with folly, their
souls with discontent; above her only mystery and silence; in her
train, philosophers questioning if it were not better for a man had he
never been born--deeming life a misfortune and extinction the only
happiness; poets singing no more of "pleasantries and trifles," but
seeking favor with poor obscenities.  Soon they were even to celebrate
the virtue of harlots, the integrity of thieves, the tenderness of
murderers, the justice of oppression.  Leading the caravan were types
abhorrent and self-opposed--effeminate men, masculine women, cheerful
cynics, infidel priests, wealthy people with no credit, patricians,
honoring and yet despising the gods, hating and yet living on the
populace.  Here was the spectacle of a republican empire, and an
emperor gathering power while he affected to disdain it.

The splendor of the capital had attracted from all nations the idle
rich, gamblers, speculators, voluptuaries, profligates, intriguers,
criminals.  To such an extreme had luxury been carried that nothing was
too sacred, nothing too costly to be enjoyed.  Digestion had become a
science, courtship an art, sleep a nightmare, comfort an
accomplishment, and the very act of living an industry.  Almost one may
say that the gods lived only in the imagination of the ignorant and the
jests of the learned.  In a growing patriciate home had become a
weariness, marriage a form, children a trouble, and the decline of
motherhood an alarming fact.  Augustus tried the remedy of legislation.
Henceforth marriage became a duty to the state.  As between men and
women, things were near a turning-point.  Woman cannot long endure
scorn nor the absence of veneration.  A law older than the tablets of
stone shall be her defence.  Love is the price of motherhood.  Soon or
late, unless it be mingled in some degree with her passion, the
wonderful gift is withdrawn and men cease to be born of her.  Slowly,
both the bitterness and the understanding of its loss turn the world to
virtue.  A new and lofty sentiment was appearing.  Woman, weary of her
part in the human comedy, had begun to inspire a love sublime as the
miracle in which she is born to act.

Happily, there were good people in Rome, even noble families, with whom
sacrifice had still a sacred power, and who practised the four virtues
of honor, bravery, wisdom, and temperance.  In rural Latium, rich and
poor clung to the old faith, and everywhere a plebeian feared alike the
assessor and the gods, and sacrificed to both.

It is no wonder the gods were falling when even Jupiter had been
outdone by a modest man who dwelt on the Palatine.  One might have seen
him there any day--a rather delicate figure with shiny blue eyes and
hair now turning gray.  He flung his lightning with unerring aim across
the great purple sea into Arabia, Africa, and Spain, and northward to
the German Ocean and eastward to the land of the Goths.  The genius of
this remarkable man had outdone the imagination of priest and poet.  A
genius for organization, like that of his illustrious uncle, gave to
Augustus a power greater than human hands had yet wielded.

A bit of gossip had travelled far and excited his curiosity.  It spoke
of a new king, with power above that of men, who was to conquer the
world.  Sayings of certain learned men came out of Judea into the land
of lost hope.  They told of the king of promise--that he would bring to
men the gift of immortal life, that the heavens would declare his
authority.  Superstitious to the blood and bone, not a few were
thrilled by the message.

The minds of thinking men were sad, fearful, and beset with curiosity.
"If there be no gods," they were wont to ask, "have we any hope and
responsibility?"  They studied the philosophers Plato, Aristotle, Zeno,
Epicurus, and were unsatisfied.

The nations were at peace, but not the souls of men.  A universal and
mighty war of the spirit was near at hand.  The skirmishers were
busy--patrician and plebeian, master and slave, oppressor and
oppressed.  Soon all were to see the line of battle, the immortal
captains, the children of darkness, the children of light, the
beginning of a great revolution.

Rome was like a weary child whose toys are gods and men, and who, being
weary of them, has yet a curiosity in their destruction.




CHAPTER 2

Those days it was near twelve o'clock by the great dial of history.
One day, about mid-afternoon, the old capital lay glowing in the
sunlight.  Its hills were white with marble and green with gardens, and
traced and spotted and flecked with gold; its thoroughfares were bright
with color--white, purple, yellow, scarlet--like a field of roses and
amarantus.

The fashionable day had begun; knight and lady were now making and
receiving visits.

Five litters and some forty slaves, who bore and followed them, were
waiting in the court of the palace of the Lady Lucia.  Beyond the walls
of white marble a noble company was gathered that summer day.  There
were the hostess and her daughter; three young noblemen, the purple
stripes on each angusticlave telling of knightly rank; a Jewish prince
in purple and gold; an old philosopher, and a poet who had been reading
love lines.  It was the age of pagan chivalry, and one might imperil
his future with poor wit or a faulty epigram.  Those older men had long
held the floor, and their hostess, seeking to rally the young knights,
challenged their skill in courtly compliment.

"O men, who have forgotten the love of women these days, look at her!"

So spoke the Lady Lucia--she that was widow of the Praefect Publius,
who fell with half his cohort in the desert wars.

She had risen from a chair of ebony enriched by cunning Etruscan
art--four mounted knights charging across its heavy back in armor of
wrought gold.  She stopped, facing the company, between two columns of
white marble beautifully sculptured.  Upon each a vine rose, limberly
and with soft leaves in the stone, from base to capital.  Her daughter
stood in the midst of a group of maids who were dressing her hair.

"Arria, will you come to me?" said the Lady Lucia.

The girl came quickly--a dainty creature of sixteen, her dark hair
waving, under jewelled fillets, to a knot behind.  From below the knot
a row of curls fell upon the folds of her outer tunic.  It was a filmy,
transparent thing--this garment--through which one could see the white
of arm and breast and the purple fillets on her legs.

"She is indeed beautiful in the yellow tunic.  I should think that
scarlet rug had caught fire and wrapped her in its flame," said the
poet Ovid.

"Nay, her heart is afire, and its light hath the color of roses," said
an old philosopher who sat by.  "Can you not see it shining through her
cheeks?"

"Young sirs," said the Lady Lucia, with a happy smile, as she raised
her daughter's hand, "now for your offers."

It was a merry challenge, and shows how lightly they treated a sacred
theme those days.

First rose the grave senator, Aulus Valerius Maro by name.

"Madame," said he, stepping forward and bowing low, "I offer my heart
and my fortune, and the strength of my arms and the fleetness of my
feet and the fair renown of my fathers."

The Lady Lucia turned to her daughter with a look of inquiry.

"Brave words are not enough," said the fair Roman maiden, smiling, as
her eyes fell.

Then came the effeminate Gracus, in head-dress and neckerchief, frilled
robe and lady's sandals.  He was of great sires who had borne the Roman
eagles into Gaul.

"Good lady," said he, "I would give my life."

"And had I more provocation," said Arria, raising a jewelled bodkin, "I
would take it."

Now the splendid Antipater, son of Herod the Great, was up and
speaking.  "I offer," said he, "my heart and wealth and half my hopes,
and the jewels of my mother, and a palace in the beautiful city of
Jerusalem."

"And a pretty funeral," the girl remarked, thoughtfully.  "Jerusalem is
half-way to Hades."

The Roman matron turned, and put her arm around the waist of the girl
and drew her close.  A young man rose from his chair and approached
them.  He was Vergilius, son of Varro, and of equestrian knighthood.
His full name was Quintus Vergilius Varro, but all knew the youth by
his nomen.  Tall and erect, with curly blond locks and blue eyes and
lips delicately curved, there was in that hall no ancestral mask or
statue so nobly favored.  He had been taught by an old philosopher to
value truth as the better part of honor--a view not common then, but
therein was a new light, spreading mysteriously.

"Dear Lady Lucia," said he, "I cannot amuse you with idle words.  I
fear to speak, and yet silence would serve me ill.  I offer not the
strength of my arms nor the fleetness of my feet, for they may fail me
tomorrow; nor my courage, for that has never been tried; nor the renown
of my fathers, for that is not mine to give; nor my life, for that
belongs to my country; nor my fortune, for I should blush to offer what
may be used to buy cattle.  I would give a thing greater and more
lasting than all of these.  It is my love."

The girl turned half away, blushing pink.  All had flung off the mask
of comedy and now wore a look of surprise.

"By my faith!" said the poet, "this young knight meant his words."

"A man of sincerity, upon my soul!" said the old philosopher.  "I have
put my hope in him, and so shall Rome.  A lucky girl is she, for has he
not riches, talent, honor, temperance, courage, and the beauty of a
god?  And was I not his teacher?"

"My brave Vergilius," the matron answered, "you are like the knights of
old I have heard my father tell of.  They had such a way with
them--never a smile and a melancholy look in their faces when they
spoke of love.  I give you the crown of gallantry, and, if she be
willing, you shall walk with her in the garden.  That is your reward."

Vergilius, advancing, took the girl's hand and kissed it.

"Will you go with me?" said he.

"On one condition," she answered, looking down at the folds of her
tunic.

"And it is?"

"That you will entertain me with philosophy and the poets," she
answered, with a smile.

"And with no talk of love," the matron added, as Arria took his arm.

They walked through the long hall of the palace, over soft rugs and
great mosaics, and between walls aglow with tints of sky and garden.
These two bore with them a tender feeling as they passed the figures of
embattled horse and host in carven wood, and mural painting and colored
mosaic and wrought metal--symbols of the martial spirit of the empire
now oddly in contrast with their own.  They came out upon a peristyle
overlooking an ample garden wherein were vines, flowers, and fruit
trees.

"You have a way of words," said she.  "It is almost possible to believe
you."

He stopped and for a long moment looked into her eyes.  "I love you,
sweet girl," he said, softly; "I love you.  As I live, I speak the
truth."

"And you a man!" she exclaimed, incredulously.

"Ay, strange as it may be, a Roman."

"My mother has told me," said she, looking down at her sandal, "that
when a man speaks, it is well to listen but never to believe."

"They are not easy to understand--these men and women," said he,
thoughtfully.  "Sometimes I think they would be nobler if they were
dumb as dogs.  Albeit I suppose they would find a new way of lying.
But, O sweet sister of Appius, try to believe me, though you believe no
other, and I--I shall believe you always."

"You had better not," said she, with a merry glance.

"I must."

"But you will doubt me soon, for I shall say that I do not love you."

For a little he knew not how to answer.  She turned away, looking off
at the Capitoline, where the toil and art of earth had wrought to show
the splendor of heaven.  Its beautiful, barbaric temples were glowing
in the sunlight.

"Life would be too serious if there were no dissimulation."  She looked
up at him as she spoke, and he saw a little quiver in her curved lips.

"That bow of your lips--I should think it fashioned by Praxiteles--and
it is for the arrows of truth."

"But a girl--she must deceive a little."

They were now among the vines.

"I do not understand you."

"Stupid fellow!" said she, in a whisper, as she turned, looking up at
him.  "Son of Varo, lovers are not ever to be trusted.  Shall I tell
you a story?  One day I was in the Via Sacra and a young man caught and
held me for a moment and tried to touch my lips--that boy, Antipater, a
good-looking wretch!"

She gave her shoulders a little shrug and drew her robe closer.  "He
