



Produced by Duncan Harold, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.











[Illustration: Henry E. Dixey in "The Man on the Box."]

THE MAN ON THE BOX

by

HAROLD MACGRATH

Author of The Grey Cloak, The Puppet Crown

Illustrated by scenes from Walter N. Lawrence's beautiful production of
the play as seen for 123 nights at the Madison Square Theatre, New York





To Miss Louise Everts




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I Introduces My Hero

   II Introduces My Heroine

  III The Adventure Begins

   IV A Family Reunion

    V The Plot Thickens

   VI The Man on the Box

  VII A Police Affair

 VIII Another Salad Idea

   IX The Heroine Hires a Groom

    X Pirate

   XI The First Ride

  XII A Ticklish Business

 XIII A Runaway

  XIV An Ordeal or Two

   XV Retrospective

  XVI The Previous Affair

 XVII Dinner is Served

XVIII Caught!

  XIX "Oh, Mister Butler"

   XX The Episode of the Stove Pipe

  XXI The Rose

 XXII The Drama Unrolls

XXIII Something About Heroes

 XXIV A Fine Lover

  XXV A Fine Heroine, Too

 XXVI The Castle of Romance




_He either fears his fate too much,
  Or his deserts are small,
Who dares not put it to the touch
  To win or lose it all._




_Dramatis Personae_

_Colonel George Annesley_      A retired Army Officer

_Miss Betty Annesley_          His daughter

_Lieutenant Robert Warburton_  Lately resigned

_Mr. John Warburton_           His elder brother, of the War
                                    Department

_Mrs. John Warburton_          The elder brother's wife

_Miss Nancy Warburton_         The lieutenant's sister

_Mr. Charles Henderson_        Her fiance

_Count Karloff_                An unattached diplomat

_Colonel Frank Raleigh_        The Lieutenant's Regimental
                                    Colonel

_Mrs. Chadwick_                A product of Washington life

_Monsieur Pierre_              A chef

_Mademoiselle Celeste_         A lady's maid

_Jane_                         Mrs. Warburton's maid

_The Hopeful_                  A baby

_William_                      A stable-boy

_Fashionable People_           Necessary for a dinner party

_Celebrities_                  Also necessary for a dinner party

_Unfashionables_               Police, cabbies, grooms, clerks,
                                    etc.



TIME--Within the past ten years.

SCENE--Washington, D.C., and its environs.




I

INTRODUCES MY HERO


If you will carefully observe any map of the world that is divided into
inches at so many miles to the inch, you will be surprised as you
calculate the distance between that enchanting Paris of France and the
third-precinct police-station of Washington, D. C, which is not
enchanting. It is several thousand miles. Again, if you will take the
pains to run your glance, no doubt discerning, over the police-blotter
at the court (and frankly, I refuse to tell you the exact date of this
whimsical adventure), you will note with even greater surprise that all
this hubbub was caused by no crime against the commonwealth of the
Republic or against the person of any of its conglomerate people. The
blotter reads, in heavy simple fist, "disorderly conduct," a phrase
which is almost as embracing as the word diplomacy, or society, or
respectability.

So far as my knowledge goes, there is no such a person as James
Osborne. If, by any unhappy chance, he _does_ exist, I trust that he
will pardon the civil law of Washington, my own measure of familiarity,
and the questionable taste on the part of my hero--hero, because, from
the rise to the fall of the curtain, he occupies the center of the
stage in this little comedy-drama, and because authors have yet to find
a happy synonym for the word. The name James Osborne was given for the
simple reason that it was the first that occurred to the culprit's
mind, so desperate an effort did he make to hide his identity.
Supposing, for the sake of an argument in his favor, supposing he had
said John Smith or William Jones or John Brown? To this very day he
would have been hiring lawyers to extricate him from libel and
false-representation suits. Besides, had he given any of these names,
would not that hound-like scent of the ever suspicious police have been
aroused?

To move round and round in the circle of commonplace, and then to pop
out of it like a tailed comet! Such is the history of many a man's
life. I have a near friend who went away from town one fall, happy and
contented with his lot. And what do you suppose he found when he
returned home? He had been nominated for alderman. It is too early to
predict the fate of this unhappy man. And what tools Fate uses with
which to carve out her devious peculiar patterns! An Apache Indian,
besmeared with brilliant greases and smelling of the water that never
freezes, an understudy to Cupid? Fudge! you will say, or Pshaw! or
whatever slang phrase is handy and, prevalent at the moment you read
and run.

I personally warn you that this is a really-truly story, though I do
not undertake to force you to believe it; neither do I purvey many
grains of salt. If Truth went about her affairs laughing, how many more
persons would turn and listen! For my part, I believe it all nonsense
the way artists have pictured Truth. The idea is pretty enough, but so
far as hitting things, it recalls the woman, the stone, and the hen. I
am convinced that Truth goes about dressed in the dowdiest of clothes,
with black-lisle gloves worn at the fingers, and shoes run down in the
heels, an exact portrait of one of Phil May's lydies. Thus it is that
we pass her by, for the artistic sense in every being is repelled at
the sight of a dowdy with weeping eyes and a nose that has been rubbed
till it is as red as a winter apple. Anyhow, if she _does_ go about in
beautiful nudity, she ought at least to clothe herself with smiles and
laughter. There are sorry enough things in the world as it is, without
a lachrymal, hypochondriacal Truth poking her face in everywhere.

Not many months ago, while seated on the stone veranda in the rear of
the Metropolitan Club in Washington (I believe we were discussing the
merits of some very old product), I recounted some of the lighter
chapters of this adventure.

_"Eempossible!"_ murmured the Russian attache, just as if the matter
had not come under his notice semi-officially.

I presume that this exclamation disclosed another side to diplomacy,
which, stripped of its fine clothes, means dexterity in hiding secrets
and in negotiating lies. When one diplomat believes what another says,
it is time for the former's government to send him packing. However,
the Englishman at my right gazed smiling into his partly emptied glass
and gently stirred the ice. I admire the English diplomat; he never
wastes a lie. He is frugal and saving.

"But the newspapers!" cried the journalist. "They never ran a line; and
an exploit like this would scarce have escaped them."

"If I remember rightly, it was reported in the regular police items of
the day," said I.

"Strange that the boys didn't look behind the scenes."

"Oh, I don't know," remarked the congressman; "lots of things happen of
which you are all ignorant. The public mustn't know everything."

"But what's the hero's name?" asked the journalist.

"That's a secret," I answered. "Besides, when it comes to the bottom of
the matter, I had something to do with the suppressing of the police
news. In a case like this, suppression becomes a law not excelled by
that which governs self-preservation. My friend has a brother in the
War Department; and together we worked wonders."

"It's a jolly droll story, however you look at it," the Englishman
admitted.

"Nevertheless, it had its tragic side; but that is even more than ever
a secret."

The Englishman looked at me sharply, even gravely; but the veranda is
only dimly illuminated at night, and his scrutiny went unrewarded.

"Eh, well!" said the Russian; "your philosopher has observed that all
mankind loves a lover."

"As all womankind loves a love-story," the Englishman added. "You ought
to be very successful with the ladies,"--turning to me.

"Not inordinately; but I shall not fail to repeat your epigram,"--and I
rose.

My watch told me that it was half after eight; and one does not receive
every day an invitation to a dinner-dance at the Chevy Chase Club.

I dislike exceedingly to intrude my own personality into this
narrative, but as I was passively concerned, I do not see how I can
avoid it. Besides, being a public man, I am not wholly averse to
publicity; first person, singular, perpendicular, as Thackeray had it,
in type looks rather agreeable to the eye. And I rather believe that I
have a moral to point out and a parable to expound.

My appointment in Washington at that time was extraordinary; that is to
say, I was a member of one of those committees that are born frequently
and suddenly in Washington, and which almost immediately after
registration in the vital statistics of national politics. I had been
sent to Congress, a dazzling halo over my head, the pride and hope of
my little country town; I had been defeated for second term; had been
recommended to serve on the committee aforesaid; served with honor, got
my name in the great newspapers, and was sent back to Congress, where I
am still to-day, waiting patiently for a discerning president and a
vacancy in the legal department of the cabinet. That's about all I am
willing to say about myself.

As for this hero of mine, he was the handsomest, liveliest rascal you
would expect to meet in a day's ride. By handsome I do not mean perfect
features, red cheeks, Byronic eyes, and so forth. That style of beauty
belongs to the department of lady novelists. I mean that peculiar manly
beauty which attracts men almost as powerfully as it does women. For
the sake of a name I shall call him Warburton. His given name in actual
life is Robert. But I am afraid that nobody but his mother and one
other woman ever called him Robert. The world at large dubbed him Bob,
and such he will remain up to that day (and may it be many years
hence!) when recourse will be had to Robert, because "Bob" would
certainly look very silly on a marble shaft.

What a friendly sign is a nickname! It is always a good fellow who is
called Bob or Bill, Jack or Jim, Tom, Dick or Harry. Even out of
Theodore there comes a Teddy. I know in my own case the boys used to
call me Chuck, simply because I was named Charles. (I haven't the
slightest doubt that I was named Charles because my good mother thought
I looked something like Vandyke's _Charles I_, though at the time of my
baptism I wore no beard whatever.) And how I hated a boy with a
high-sounding, unnicknamable given name!--with his round white collar
and his long glossy curls! I dare say he hated the name, the collar,
and the curls even more than I did. Whenever you run across a name
carded in this stilted fashion, "A. Thingumy Soandso", you may make up
your mind at once that the owner is ashamed of his first name and is
trying manfully to live it down and eventually forgive his parents.

Warburton was graduated from West Point, ticketed to a desolate
frontier post, and would have worn out his existence there but for his
guiding star, which was always making frantic efforts to bolt its
established orbit. One day he was doing scout duty, perhaps half a mile
in advance of the pay-train, as they called the picturesque caravan
which, consisting of a canopied wagon and a small troop of cavalry in
dingy blue, made progress across the desert-like plains of Arizona. The
troop was some ten miles from the post, and as there had been no sign
of Red Eagle all that day, they concluded that the rumor of his being
on a drunken rampage with half a dozen braves was only a rumor.
Warburton had just passed over a roll of earth, and for a moment the
pay-train had dropped out of sight. It was twilight; opalescent waves
of heat rolled above the blistered sands. A pale yellow sky, like an
inverted bowl rimmed with delicate blue and crimson hues, encompassed
