

E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 17402-h.htm or 17402-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/4/0/17402/17402-h/17402-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/4/0/17402/17402-h.zip)





THE ADVENTURES OF KATHLYN

by

HAROLD MACGRATH

Author of The Man on the Box, The Goose Girl, Half a Rogue, etc.







[Frontispiece: It will be a hard trek.]




Indianapolis
The Bobbs-Merrill Company
Publishers
Copyright 1914
Harold MacGrath




TO W. N. SELIG




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I  THE GOLDEN GIRL
    II  THE UNWELCOME THRONE
   III  THE TWO ORDEALS
    IV  HOW TIME MOVES
     V  THE COURT OF THE LION
    VI  THE TEMPLE
   VII  QUICKSANDS
  VIII  THE SLAVE MART
    IX  THE COLONEL IN CHAINS
     X  WAITING
    XI  THE WHITE ELEPHANT
   XII  THE PLAN OF RAMABAI
  XIII  LOVE
   XIV  THE VEILED CANDIDATES
    XV  THE SEVEN LEOPARDS
   XVI  THE RED WOLF
  XVII  LORD OF THE WORLD
 XVIII  PATIENCE
   XIX  MAGIC
    XX  BATTLE, BATTLE, BATTLE
   XXI  THE WHITE GODDESS
  XXII  BEHIND THE CURTAINS
 XXIII  REMORSE
  XXIV  THE INVINCIBLE WILL
   XXV  ON THE SLOOP
  XXVI  THE THIRD BAR



ILLUSTRATIONS


   It will be a hard trek (Frontispiece)

   Where did you get this medal?

   Ahmed salaamed deeply.

   So they comforted each other.

   You'll know how to soothe him.

   My arm pains me badly.

   And thus Umballa found them.

   Kathyln turned the tide.




THE ADVENTURES OF KATHLYN


CHAPTER I

THE GOLDEN GIRL

Under a canopied platform stood a young girl, modeling in clay.  The
glare of the California sunshine, filtering through the canvas, became
mellowed, warm and golden.  Above the girl's head--yellow like the
stalk of wheat--there hovered a kind of aureola, as if there had risen
above it a haze of impalpable gold dust.

A poet I know might have cried out that here ended his quest of the
Golden Girl.  Straight she stood at this moment, lovely of face,
rounded of form, with an indescribable suggestion of latent physical
power or magnetism.  On her temples there were little daubs of clay,
caused doubtless by impatient fingers sweeping back occasional wind
blown locks of hair.  There was even a daub on the side of her handsome
sensitive nose.

Her hand, still filled with clay, dropped to her side, and a tableau
endured for a minute or two, suggesting a remote period, a Persian
idyl, mayhap.  With a smile on her lips she stared at the living model.
The chatoyant eyes of the leopard stared back, a flicker of
restlessness in their brilliant yellow deeps.  The tip of the tail
twitched.

"You beautiful thing!" she said.

She began kneading the clay again, and with deft fingers added bits
here and there to the creature which had grown up under her strong
supple fingers.

"Kathlyn!  Oh, Kit!"

The sculptress paused, the pucker left her brow, and she turned, her
face beaming, for her sister Winnie was the apple of her eye, and she
brooded over her as the mother would have done had the mother lived.
For Winnie, dark as Kathlyn was light, was as careless and aimless as
thistledown in the wind.

A collie leaped upon the platform and began pawing Kathlyn, and shortly
after the younger sister followed.  Neither of the girls noted the
stiffening mustaches of the leopard.  The animal rose, and his nostrils
palpitated.  He hated the dog with a hatred not unmixed with fear.
Treachery is in the marrow of all cats.  To breed them in captivity
does not matter.  Sooner or later they will strike.  Never before had
the leopard been so close to his enemy, free of the leash.

"Kit, it is just wonderful.  However can you do it?  Some day we'll
make dad take us to Paris, where you can exhibit them."

A snarl from the leopard, answered by a growl from the collie, brought
Kathlyn's head about.  The cat leaped, but toward Winnie, not the
collie.  With a cry of terror Winnie turned and ran in the direction of
the bungalow.  Kathlyn, seizing the leash, followed like the wind,
hampered though she was by the apron.  The cat loped after the fleeing
girl, gaining at each bound.  The yelping of the collie brought forth
from various points low rumbling sounds, which presently developed into
roars.

Winnie turned sharply around the corner of the bungalow toward the
empty animal cages, to attract her father and at the same time rouse
some of the keepers.  Seeing the door of an empty cage open, and that
it was approached by a broad runway, she flew to it, entered and
slammed the door and held it.  The cat, now hot with the lust to kill,
threw himself against the bars, snarling and spitting.

Kathlyn called out to him sharply, and fearlessly approached him.  She
began talking in a monotone.  His ears went flat against his head, but
he submitted to her touch because invariably it soothed him, and
because he sensed some undefinable power whenever his gaze met hers.
She snapped the leash on his collar just as her father came running up,
pale and disturbed.  He ran to the door and opened it.

"Winnie, you poor little kitten," he said, taking her in his arms, "how
many times have I told you never to take that dog about when Kit's
leopard is off the leash?"

"I didn't think," she sobbed.

"No.  Kit here and I must always do your thinking for you.  Ahmed!"

"Yes, Sahib," answered the head keeper.

"See if you can stop that racket over there.  Sadie may lose her litter
if it keeps up."

The lean brown Mohammedan trotted away in obedience to his orders.  He
knew how to stop captive lions from roaring.  He knew how to send
terror to their hearts.  As he ran he began to hiss softly.

Colonel Hare, with his arm about Winnie, walked toward the bungalow.

"Lock your pet up, Kit," he called over his shoulder, "and come in to
tea."

Kathlyn spoke soothingly to the leopard, scratched his head behind the
ears, and shortly a low satisfied rumble stirred his throat, and his
tail no longer slashed about.  She led him to his own cage, never
ceasing to talk, locked the door, then turned and walked thoughtfully
toward the bungalow.

She was wondering what this gift was that put awe into the eyes of the
native keepers on her father's wild animal farm and temporary peace in
the hearts of the savage beasts.  She realized that she possessed it,
but it was beyond analysis.  Often some wild-eyed keeper would burst in
upon her.  Some newly captive lion or tiger was killing itself from
mere passion, and wouldn't the Mem-sahib come at once and talk to it?
There was a kind of pity in her heart for these poor wild things, and
perhaps they perceived this pity, which was fearless.

"She gets a little from me, I suppose," Colonel Hare had once answered
to a query, "for I've always had a way with four footed things.  But I
think Ahmed is right.  Kathlyn is heaven born.  I've seen the night
when Brocken would be tame beside the pandemonium round-about.  Yet
half an hour after Kit starts the rounds everything quiets down.  The
gods are in it."

The living-room of the bungalow was large and comfortable.  The walls
were adorned with the heads of wild beasts and their great furry hides
shared honors with the Persian rugs on the floor.  Hare was a man who
would pack up at a moment's notice and go to the far ends of the world
to find a perfect black panther, a cheetah with a litter, or a great
horned rhinoceros.  He was tall and broad, and amazingly active, for
all that his hair and mustache were almost white.  For thirty years or
more he had gone about the hazardous enterprise of supplying zoological
gardens and circuses with wild beasts.  He was known from Hamburg to
Singapore, from Mombassa to Rio Janeiro.  The Numidian lion, the Rajput
tiger, and the Malayan panther had cause to fear Hare Sahib.  He was
even now preparing to return to Ceylon for an elephant hunt.

The two daughters went over to the tea tabouret, where a matronly maid
was busying with the service.  The fragrant odor of tea permeated the
room.  Hare paused at his desk.  Lines suddenly appeared on his bronzed
face.  He gazed for a space at the calendar.  The day was the fifteenth
of July.  Should he go back there, or should he give up the expedition?
He might never return.  India and the border countries!  What a land,
full of beauty and romance and terror and squalor, at once barbaric and
civilized!  He loved it and hated it, and sometimes feared it, he who
had faced on foot many a wounded tiger.

He shrugged, reached into the desk for a box of Jaipur brass enamel and
took from it a medal attached to a ribbon.  The golden disk was
encrusted with uncut rubies and emeralds.

"Girls," he called.  "Come here a moment.  Martha, that will be all,"
with a nod toward the door.  "I never showed you this before."

"Goodness gracious!" cried Winnie, reaching out her hand.

"Why, it looks like a decoration, father," said Kathlyn.  "What lovely
stones!  It would make a beautiful pendant."

"Vanity, vanity, all is vanity," said the colonel, smiling down into
their charming faces.  "Do you love your old dad?"

"Love you!" they exclaimed in unison, indignantly, too, since the
question was an imputation of the fact.

"Would you be lonesome if I took the Big Trek?" whimsically.

"Father!"

"Dad!"

They pressed about him, as vines about an oak.

"Hang it, I swear that this shall be the last hunt.  I'm rich.  We'll
get rid of all these brutes and spend the rest of the years seeing the
show places.  I'm a bit tired myself of jungle fodder.  We'll go to
Paris, and Berlin, and Rome, and Vienna.  And you, Kit, shall go and
tell Rodin that you've inherited the spirit of Gerome.  And you,
Winnie, shall make a stab at grand opera."

Winnie gurgled her delight, but her sister searched her father's eyes.
She did not quite like the way he said those words.  His voice lacked
its usual heartiness and spontaneity.

"Where did you get this medal, father?" she asked.

[Illustration: Where did you get this medal?]

"That's what I started out to tell you."

"Were you afraid we might wish to wear it or have it made over?"
laughed Winnie, who never went below the surface of things.

"No.  The truth is, I had almost forgotten it.  But the preparations
for India recalled it to mind.  It represents a royal title conferred
on me by the king of Allaha.  You have never been to India, Kit.
Allaha is the name we hunters give that border kingdom.  Some day
England will gobble it up; only waiting for a good excuse."

"What big thing did you do?" demanded Kathlyn, her eyes still filled
with scrutiny.

"What makes you think it was big?" jestingly.

"Because," she answered seriously, "you never do anything but big
things.  As the lion is among beasts, you are among men."

"Good lord!"  The colonel reached embarrassedly for his pipe, lighted
it, puffed a few minutes, then laid it down.  "India is full of strange
tongues and strange kingdoms and principalities.  Most of them are
dominated by the British Raj, some are only protected, while others do
about as they please.  This state"--touching the order--"does about as
it did since the days of the first white rover who touched the shores
of Hind.  It is small, but that signifies nothing; for you can brew a
mighty poison in a small pot.  Well, I happened to save the old king's
life."

"I knew it would be something like that," said Kathlyn.  "Go on.  Tell
it all."

The colonel had recourse to his pipe again.  He smoked on till the coal
was dead.  The girls waited patiently.  They knew that his silence
meant that he was only marshaling the events in their chronological
order.

"The king was a kindly old chap, simple, yet shrewd, and with that
slumbrous oriental way of accomplishing his ends, despite all
obstacles.  Underneath this apparent simplicity I discovered a grim
sardonic humor.  Trust the Oriental for always having that packed away
