



Produced by Charles Franks, Robert Rowe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










Alice of Old Vincennes


by

Maurice Thompson




PREFACE


To M. PLACIDE VALCOUR
  M. D., Ph D., LL. D.

MY DEAR DR. VALCOUR: You gave me the Inspiration which made this story
haunt me until I wrote it. Gaspard Roussillon's letter, a mildewed
relic of the year 1788, which you so kindly permitted me to copy, as
far as it remained legible, was the point from which my imagination,
accompanied by my curiosity, set out upon a long and delightful quest.
You laughed at me when I became enthusiastic regarding the possible
historical importance at that ancient find, alas! fragmentary epistle;
but the old saying about the beatitude of him whose cachinations are
latest comes handy to me just now, and I must remind you that "I told
you so." True enough, it was history pure and simple that I had in mind
while enjoying the large hospitality of your gulf-side home. Gaspard
Roussillon's letter then appealed to my greed for materials which would
help along the making of my little book "The Story of Louisiana."
Later, however, as my frequent calls upon you for both documents and
suggestions have informed you, I fell to strumming a different guitar.
And now to you I dedicate this historical romance of old Vincennes, as
a very appropriate, however slight, recognition of your scholarly
attainments, your distinguished career in a noble profession, and your
descent from one of the earliest French families (if not the very
earliest) long resident at that strange little post on the Wabash, now
one of the most beautiful cities between the greet river and the ocean.

Following, with ever tantalized expectancy, the broken and breezy hints
in the Roussillon letter, I pursued a will-o'-the-wisp, here, there,
yonder, until by slowly arriving increments I gathered up a large
amount of valuable facts, which when I came to compare them with the
history of Clark's conquest of the Wabash Valley, fitted amazingly well
into certain spaces heretofore left open in that important yet sadly
imperfect record.

You will find that I was not so wrong in suspecting that Emile Jazon,
mentioned in the Roussillon letter, was a brother of Jean Jazon and a
famous scout in the time of Boone and Clark. He was, therefore, a
kinsman of yours on the maternal side, and I congratulate you. Another
thing may please you, the success which attended my long and patient
research with a view to clearing up the connection between Alice
Roussillon's romantic life, as brokenly sketched in M. Roussillon's
letter, and the capture of Vincennes by Colonel George Rogers Clark.

Accept, then, this book, which to those who care only for history will
seem but an idle romance, while to the lovers of romance it may look
strangely like the mustiest history. In my mind, and in yours I hope,
it will always be connected with a breezy summer-house on a headland of
the Louisiana gulf coast, the rustling of palmetto leaves, the fine
flash of roses, a tumult of mocking-bird voices, the soft lilt of
Creole patois, and the endless dash and roar of a fragrant sea over
which the gulls and pelicans never ceased their flight, and beside
which you smoked while I dreamed.

MAURICE THOMPSON.
  JULY, 1900.





Contents

     I. Under the Cherry Tree
    II. A Letter from Afar
   III. The Rape of the Demijohn
    IV. The First Mayor of Vincennes
     V. Father Gibault
    VI. A Fencing Bout
   VII. The Mayor's Party
  VIII. The Dilemma of Captain Helm
    IX. The Honors of War
     X. M. Roussillon Entertains Colonel Hamilton
    XI. A Sword and a Horse Pistol
   XII. Manon Lescaut, and a Rapier-Thrust
  XIII. A Meeting in the Wilderness
   XIV. A Prisoner of Love
    XV. Virtue in a Locket
   XVI. Father Beret's Old Battle
  XVII. A March through Cold Water
 XVIII. A Duel by Moonlight
   XIX. The Attack
    XX. Alice's Flag
   XXI. Some Transactions in Scalps
  XXII. Clark Advises Alice
 XXIII. And So It Ended





Alice of Old Vincennes





CHAPTER I

UNDER THE CHERRY TREE


Up to the days of Indiana's early statehood, probably as late as 1825,
there stood, in what is now the beautiful little city of Vincennes on
the Wabash, the decaying remnant of an old and curiously gnarled cherry
tree, known as the Roussillon tree, le cerisier de Monsieur Roussillon,
as the French inhabitants called it, which as long as it lived bore
fruit remarkable for richness of flavor and peculiar dark ruby depth of
color. The exact spot where this noble old seedling from la belle
France flourished, declined, and died cannot be certainly pointed out;
for in the rapid and happy growth of Vincennes many land-marks once
notable, among them le cerisier de Monsieur Roussillon, have been
destroyed and the spots where they stood, once familiar to every eye in
old Vincennes, are now lost in the pleasant confusion of the new town.

The security of certain land titles may have largely depended upon the
disappearance of old, fixed objects here and there. Early records were
loosely kept, indeed, scarcely kept at all; many were destroyed by
designing land speculators, while those most carefully preserved often
failed to give even a shadowy trace of the actual boundaries of the
estates held thereby; so that the position of a house or tree not
infrequently settled an important question of property rights left open
by a primitive deed. At all events the Roussillon cherry tree
disappeared long ago, nobody living knows how, and with it also
vanished, quite as mysteriously, all traces of the once important
Roussillon estate. Not a record of the name even can be found, it is
said, in church or county books.

The old, twisted, gum-embossed cherry tree survived every other
distinguishing feature of what was once the most picturesque and
romantic place in Vincennes. Just north of it stood, in the early
French days, a low, rambling cabin surrounded by rude verandas
overgrown with grapevines. This was the Roussillon place, the most
pretentious home in all the Wabash country. Its owner was Gaspard
Roussillon, a successful trader with the Indians. He was rich, for the
time and the place, influential to a degree, a man of some education,
who had brought with him to the wilderness a bundle of books and a
taste for reading.

From faded letters and dimly remembered talk of those who once clung
fondly to the legends and traditions of old Vincennes, it is drawn that
the Roussillon cherry tree stood not very far away from the present
site of the Catholic church, on a slight swell of ground overlooking a
wide marshy flat and the silver current of the Wabash. If the tree grew
there, then there too stood the Roussillon house with its cosy log
rooms, its clay-daubed chimneys and its grapevine-mantled verandas,
while some distance away and nearer the river the rude fort with its
huddled officers' quarters seemed to fling out over the wild landscape,
through its squinting and lopsided port-holes, a gaze of stubborn
defiance.

Not far off was the little log church, where one good Father Beret, or
as named by the Indians, who all loved him, Father Blackrobe, performed
the services of his sacred calling; and scattered all around were the
cabins of traders, soldiers and woodsmen forming a queer little town,
the like of which cannot now be seen anywhere on the earth.

It is not known just when Vincennes was first founded; but most
historians make the probable date very early in the eighteenth century,
somewhere between 1710 and 1730. In 1810 the Roussillon cherry tree was
thought by a distinguished botanical letter-writer to be at least fifty
years old, which would make the date of its planting about 1760.
Certainly as shown by the time-stained family records upon which this
story of ours is based, it was a flourishing and wide-topped tree in
early summer of 1778, its branches loaded to drooping with luscious
fruit. So low did the dark red clusters hang at one point that a tall
young girl standing on the ground easily reached the best ones and made
her lips purple with their juice while she ate them.

That was long ago, measured by what has come to pass on the gentle
swell of rich country from which Vincennes overlooks the Wabash. The
new town flourishes notably and its appearance marks the latest limit
of progress. Electric cars in its streets, electric lights in its
beautiful homes, the roar of railway trains coming and going in all
directions, bicycles whirling hither and thither, the most fashionable
styles of equipages, from brougham to pony-phaeton, make the days of
flint-lock guns and buckskin trousers seem ages down the past; and yet
we are looking back over but a little more than a hundred and twenty
years to see Alice Roussillon standing under the cherry tree and
holding high a tempting cluster of fruit, while a very short,
hump-backed youth looks up with longing eyes and vainly reaches for it.
The tableau is not merely rustic, it is primitive. "Jump!" the girl is
saying in French, "jump, Jean; jump high!"

Yes, that was very long ago, in the days when women lightly braved what
the strongest men would shrink from now.

Alice Roussillon was tall, lithe, strongly knit, with an almost perfect
figure, judging by what the master sculptors carved for the form of
Venus, and her face was comely and winning, if not absolutely
beautiful; but the time and the place were vigorously indicated by her
dress, which was of coarse stuff and simply designed. Plainly she was a
child of the American wilderness, a daughter of old Vincennes on the
Wabash in the time that tried men's souls.

"Jump, Jean!" she cried, her face laughing with a show of
cheek-dimples, an arching of finely sketched brows and the twinkling of
large blue-gray eyes.

"Jump high and get them!"

While she waved her sun-browned hand holding the cherries aloft, the
breeze blowing fresh from the southwest tossed her hair so that some
loose strands shone like rimpled flames. The sturdy little hunchback
did leap with surprising activity; but the treacherous brown hand went
higher, so high that the combined altitude of his jump and the reach of
his unnaturally long arms was overcome. Again and again he sprang
vainly into the air comically, like a long-legged, squat-bodied frog.

"And you brag of your agility and strength, Jean," she laughingly
remarked; "but you can't take cherries when they are offered to you.
What a clumsy bungler you are."

"I can climb and get some," he said with a hideously happy grin, and
immediately embraced the bole of the tree, up which he began scrambling
almost as fast as a squirrel.

When he had mounted high enough to be extending a hand for a hold on a
crotch, Alice grasped his leg near the foot and pulled him down,
despite his clinging and struggling, until his hands clawed in the soft
earth at the tree's root, while she held his captive leg almost
vertically erect.

It was a show of great strength; but Alice looked quite unconscious of
it, laughing merrily, the dimples deepening in her plump cheeks, her
forearm, now bared to the elbow, gleaming white and shapely while its
muscles rippled on account of the jerking and kicking of Jean.

All the time she was holding the cherries high in her other hand,
shaking them by the twig to which their slender stems attached them,
and saying in a sweetly tantalizing tone:

"What makes you climb downward after cherries. Jean? What a foolish
fellow you are, indeed, trying to grabble cherries out of the ground,
as you do potatoes! I'm sure I didn't suppose that you knew so little
as that."

Her French was colloquial, but quite good, showing here and there what
we often notice in the speech of those who have been educated in
isolated places far from that babel of polite energies which we call
the world; something that may be described as a bookish cast appearing
oddly in the midst of phrasing distinctly rustic and local,--a
peculiarity not easy to transfer from one language to another.

Jean the hunchback was a muscular little deformity and a wonder of good
nature. His head looked unnaturally large, nestling grotesquely between
the points of his lifted and distorted shoulders, like a shaggy black
animal in the fork of a broken tree. He was bellicose in his amiable
way and never knew just when to acknowledge defeat. How long he might
have kept up the hopeless struggle with the girl's invincible grip
would be hard to guess. His release was caused by the approach of a
third person, who wore the robe of a Catholic priest and the
countenance of a man who had lived and suffered a long time without
much loss of physical strength and endurance.

This was Pere Beret, grizzly, short, compact, his face deeply lined,
his mouth decidedly aslant on account of some lost teeth, and his eyes
set deep under gray, shaggy brows. Looking at him when his features
were in repose a first impression might not have been favorable; but
seeing him smile or hearing him speak changed everything. His voice was
sweetness itself and his smile won you on the instant. Something like a
pervading sorrow always seemed to be close behind his eyes and under
his speech; yet he was a genial, sometimes almost jolly, man, very
prone to join in the lighter amusements of his people.

"Children, children, my children," he called out as he approached along
a little pathway leading up from the direction of the church, "what are
you doing now? Bah there, Alice, will you pull Jean's leg off?"

At first they did not hear him, they were so nearly deafened by their
own vocal discords.

"Why are you standing on your head with your feet so high in air,
Jean?" he added. "It's not a polite attitude in the presence of a young
lady. Are you a pig, that you poke your nose in the dirt?"

Alice now turned her bright head and gave Pere Beret a look of frank
welcome, which at the same time shot a beam of willful self-assertion.

"My daughter, are you trying to help Jean up the tree feet foremost?"
the priest added, standing where he had halted just outside of the
straggling yard fence.

He had his hands on his hips and was quietly chuckling at the scene
before him, as one who, although old, sympathized with the natural and
harmless sportiveness of young people and would as lief as not join in
a prank or two.

"You see what I'm doing, Father Beret," said Alice, "I am preventing a
great damage to you. You will maybe lose a good many cherry pies and
dumplings if I let Jean go. He was climbing the tree to pilfer the
fruit; so I pulled him down, you understand."

"Ta, ta!" exclaimed the good man, shaking his gray head; "we must
reason with the child. Let go his leg, daughter, I will vouch for him;
eh, Jean?"

Alice released the hunchback, then laughed gayly and tossed the cluster
of cherries into his hand, whereupon he began munching them voraciously
and talking at the same time.

"I knew I could get them," he boasted; "and see, I have them now." He
hopped around, looking like a species of ill-formed monkey.

Pere Beret came and leaned on the low fence close to Alice. She was
almost as tall as he.

"The sun scorches to-day," he said, beginning to mop his furrowed face
with a red-flowered cotton handkerchief; "and from the look of the sky
yonder," pointing southward, "it is going to bring on a storm. How is
Madame Roussillon to-day?"

"She is complaining as she usually does when she feels extremely well,"
