

E-text prepared by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (http://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      http://archive.org/details/womeninmodernind00hutcrich


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by equal signs is in bold face (=bold=).





WOMEN IN MODERN INDUSTRY

    *       *       *       *       *

"What is woman but an enemy of friendship, an unavoidable punishment, a
necessary evil, a natural temptation, a desirable affliction, a constantly
flowing source of tears, a wicked work of nature covered with a shining
varnish?"--SAINT CHRYSOSTOM.

  "And wo in winter tyme with wakying a-nyghtes,
  To rise to the ruel to rock the cradel,
  Both to kard and to kembe, to clouten and to wasche,
  To rubbe and to rely, russhes to pilie
  That reuthe is to rede othere in ryme shewe
  The wo of these women that wonyeth in Cotes."[1]
                                LANGLAND: _Piers Ploughman_, x. 77.

"Two justices of the peace, the mayor or other head officer of any city
(etc.) and two aldermen ... may appoint any such woman as is of the age of
12 years and under the age of 40 years and unmarried and forth of service
... to be retained or serve by the year, week or day for such wages and in
such reasonable sort as they shall think meet; and if any such woman shall
refuse so to serve, then it shall be lawful for the said justices (etc.)
to commit such woman to ward until she shall be bounden to
serve."--_Statute of Labourers_, 1563.

"Every woman spinner's wage shall be such as, following her labour duly
and painfully, she may make it account to."--JUSTICES OF WILTSHIRE:
_Assessment of Wages_, 1604.

"Sometimes one feels that one dare not contemplate too closely the life of
our working women, it is such a grave reproach."--Miss ANNA TRACEY,
_Factory Inspector_, 1913.

"The State has trampled on its subjects for 'ends of State'; it has
neglected them; it is beginning to act consciously for them.... The
progressive enrichment of human life and the remedy of its ills is not a
private affair. It is a public charge. Indeed it is the one and noblest
field of corporate action. The perception of that truth gives rise to the
new art of social politics."--B. KIRKMAN GRAY.

    *       *       *       *       *


WOMEN IN MODERN INDUSTRY

by

B. L. HUTCHINS

Author of "Conflicting Ideals" and (with Mrs. Spencer, D.Sc.)
"A History of Factory Legislation"

With a Chapter Contributed by J. J. Mallon







London
G. Bell and Sons, Ltd.
1915




PREFACE.


It may be well to give a brief explanation of the scheme of the present
work. Part I. was complete in its present form, save for unimportant
corrections, before the summer of 1914. The outbreak of war necessitated
some delay in publication, after which it became evident that some
modification in the scheme and plan of the book must be made. The question
was, whether to revise the work already accomplished so as to bring it
more in tune with the tremendous events that are fresh in all our minds.
For various reasons I decided not to do this, but to leave the earlier
chapters as they stood, save for bringing a few figures up to date, and to
treat of the effects of the war in a separate chapter. I was influenced in
taking this course by the idea that even if the portions written in happy
ignorance of approaching trouble should now appear out of date and out of
focus, yet future students of social history might find a special interest
in the fact that the passages in question describe the situation of women
workers as it appeared almost immediately before the great upheaval.
Moreover, Chapter IVA. contained a section on German women in Trade
Unions. I had no material to re-write this section; I did not wish to omit
it. The course that seemed best was to leave it precisely as it stood, and
the same plan has been adopted with all the pre-war chapters.

The main plan of the book is to give a sketch or outline of the position
of working women, with special reference to the effects of the industrial
revolution on her employment, taking "industrial revolution" in its
broader sense, not as an event of the late eighteenth century, but as a
continuous process still actively at work. I have aimed at description
rather than theory. Some of the current theories about women's position
are of great interest, and I make no pretence to an attitude of detachment
in regard to them, but it certainly appears to me that we need more facts
and knowledge before theory can be based on a sure foundation. Here and
there I have drawn my own conclusions from what I saw and heard, but these
conclusions are mostly provisional, and may well be modified in the light
of clearer knowledge.

I am fully conscious of an inadequacy of treatment and of certain defects
in form. Women's industry is a smaller subject than men's, but it is even
more complicated and difficult. There are considerable omissions in my
book. I have not, for instance, discussed, save quite incidentally, the
subject of the industrial employment of married women or the subject of
domestic service, omissions which are partly due to my knowledge that
studies of these questions were in process of preparation by hands more
capable than mine. There are other omissions which are partly due to the
lack or unsatisfactory nature of the material. A standard history of the
Industrial Revolution does not yet exist (Monsieur Mantoux's valuable book
covers only the earlier period), and the necessary information has to be
collected from miscellaneous sources. In dealing with the effects of war,
my treatment is necessarily most imperfect. The situation throughout the
autumn, winter, and spring 1914-15, was a continually shifting one, and to
represent it faithfully is a most difficult task. Nor can we for years
expect to gauge the changes involved. With all our efforts to see and take
stock of the social and economic effects of war, we who watch and try to
understand the social meanings of the most terrible convulsion in history
probably do not perceive the most significant reactions. That the position
of industrial women must be considerably modified we cannot doubt; but the
modifications that strike the imagination most forcibly now, such as the
transference of women to new trades, may possibly not appear the most
important in twenty or thirty years' time. Even so, perhaps, a
contemporary sketch of the needs of working women; of the success or
failure of our social machinery to supply and keep pace with those needs
at a time of such tremendous stress and tension, may not be altogether
without interest.

I have to express my great indebtedness to Mr. Mallon, Secretary of the
Anti-Sweating League, who has given me the benefit of his unrivalled
knowledge and experience in a chapter on women's wages. I have also to
thank Miss Mabel Lawrence, who for a short time assisted me in the study
of women in Unions, and both then and afterwards contributed many helpful
suggestions to the work she shared with me. To the Labour Department I am
indebted for kind and much appreciated permission to use its library; to
Miss Elspeth Carr for drawing my attention to the "Petition of the Poor
Spinners," an interesting document which will be found in the Appendix;
and to many Trade Union secretaries and others for their kindness in
allowing me to interview them and presenting me with documents. Miss Mary
Macarthur generously loaned a whole series of the Trade Union League
Reports, which were of the greatest service in tracing the early history
of the League. I regret that Mr. Tawney's book on Minimum Rates in the
Tailoring Trades; Messrs. Bland, Brown, and Tawney's valuable collection
of documents on economic history; and the collection of letters from
working women, entitled "Maternity," all came into my hands too late for
me to make as much use of them as I should have liked to do.

B. L. H.

HAMPSTEAD, _September 1915_.




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

  PART I

  CHAPTER I
    SKETCH OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN IN ENGLAND BEFORE THE
    INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION                                                1

  CHAPTER II
    WOMEN AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION                                 31

  CHAPTER III
    STATISTICS OF THE LIFE AND EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN                      75

  CHAPTER IV
    WOMEN IN TRADE UNIONS                                               92

  CHAPTER IVA
    WOMEN IN UNIONS--_continued_                                       154

  CHAPTER V
    SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION OF PART I.                                  178


  PART II

  CHAPTER VI
    WOMEN'S WAGES IN THE WAGE CENSUS OF 1906                           213

  CHAPTER VII
    THE EFFECTS OF THE WAR ON THE EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN                  239

  APPENDIX TO CHAPTERS II., IV., AND VII.                              267

  AUTHORITIES                                                          299

  INDEX                                                                305




INTRODUCTORY


Little attention has been given until quite recent times to the position
of the woman worker and the special problems concerning her industrial and
commercial employment. The historical material relating to the share of
women in industry is extremely scanty. Women in mediaeval times must have
done a very large share of the total work necessary for carrying on social
existence, but the work of men was more specialised, more differentiated,
more picturesque. It thus claimed and obtained a larger share of the
historian's attention. The introduction of machinery in the eighteenth
century effected great changes, and for the first time the reactions of
the work on the workers began to be considered. Women and children who had
previously been employed in their own homes or in small workshops were now
collected in factories, drilled to work in large numbers together. The
work was not at first very different, but the environment was enormously
altered. The question of the child in industry at first occupied attention
almost to the exclusion of women. But the one led naturally to the other.
The woman in industry could no longer be ignored: she had become an
economic force.

The position of the industrial woman in modern times is closely related,
one way or another, to the industrial revolution, but the relation cannot
be stated in any short or easy formula. The reaction of modern methods on
woman's labour is highly complex and assumes many forms. The pressure on
the woman worker which causes her to be employed for long hours, low
wages, in bad conditions, and with extreme insecurity of employment, is
frequently supposed to be due to the development of industry on a larger
scale. It is, in my view, due rather to the survival of social conditions
of the past in an age when an enormous increase in productive power has
transformed the conditions of production. New institutions and new social
conditions are needed to suit the change in the conditions of production.
It is not the change in the material environment which is to blame, so
much as the failure of organised society so far to understand and control
the material changes. The capitalist employer organised industry on the
basis of a "reserve of labour," and on the principle of employing the
cheapest workers he could get, not out of original sin, or because he was
so very much worse than other people, but simply because it was the only
way he knew of, and no one was there to indicate an alternative
course--much less compel him to take it. Much more guilty than the
cotton-spinners or dock companies were the wealthy governing classes, who
permitted the conditions of work to be made inhuman, and yet trampled on
the one flower the people had plucked from their desolation--the joy of
union and fellowship; who allowed a system of casual labour to become
established, and then prated about the bad habits and irregularity which
were the results of their own folly.

Organised society had hardly begun to understand the needs and
implications of the industrial revolution until quite late in the
nineteenth century, and the failure of statesmanlike foresight has been
especially disastrous to women, because of their closer relationship to
the family. There is no economic necessity under present circumstances for
women to work so long, so hard, and for such low wages as they do; on the
contrary, we know now that it is bad economy that they should be so
employed. But the subordinate position of the girl and the woman in the
family, the lack of a tradition of association with her fellows, has
reacted unfavourably on her economic capacity in the world of competitive
trade. She is preponderantly an immature worker; she expects, quite
reasonably, humanly and naturally, to marry. Whether her expectation is or
is not destined to be fulfilled, it constitutes an element of impermanence
in her occupational career which reacts unfavourably on her earnings and
conditions of employment.

The tradition of obedience, docility and isolation in the family make it
hard for the young girl-worker to assert her claims effectively; both her
ignorance and her tradition of modesty make it difficult for her to voice
the requirements of decent living, some of the most essential of which are
taboo--not to be spoken of to a social superior or an individual of the
opposite sex. The whole circumstances of her life make her employment an
uncertain matter, contingent upon all sorts of outside circumstances,
which have little or nothing to do with her own industrial capacity. In
youth, marriage may at any time take her out of the economic struggle and
render wage-earning superfluous and unnecessary. On the other hand, the
sudden pressure of necessity, bereavement, or sickness or unemployment of
husband or bread-winning relative, may throw a woman unexpectedly on the
labour market. It is a special feature of women's employment that, unlike
the work of men, who for the most part have to labour from early youth to
some more or less advanced age, women's work is subject to considerable
interruption, and is contingent on family circumstances, whence it comes
about that women may not always need paid work, but when they do they
often want it so badly that they are ready to take anything they can get.
The woman worker also is more susceptible to class influences than are her
male social equals, and charity and philanthropy often tend in some degree
to corrupt the loyalty and divert the interest of working women from their
own class. These are some of the reasons why associations for mutual
protection and assistance have been so slow in making way among women
workers.

The protection of the State, though valuable as far as it goes, has been
inadequate: how inadequate can be seen in the Reports of the Women Factory
Inspectors, who, in spite of their insufficient numbers, take so large a
share in the administration of the Factory Act. Their Reports, however, do
not reach a large circle. The Insurance Act has been the means of a more
startling propaganda. The results following the working of this Act shew
that although women are longer lived than men, they have considerably more
sickness. The claims of women for sick benefit had been underestimated,
and many local insurance societies became nearly insolvent in consequence.
A cry of malingering was raised in various quarters, and we were asked to
believe that excessive claims could be prevented by stricter and more
careful administration. This solution of the problem, however, is quite
inadequate to explain the facts. There may have been some malingering, but
it has occurred chiefly in cases where the earnings of the workers were so
low as to be scarcely above the sickness benefit provided by the Act, or
even below it. In other cases the excess claims were due to the fact that
medical advice and treatment was a luxury the women had previously been
unable to afford even when they greatly needed it; or to the fact that
