



Produced by Doug Levy






THE MILLER OF OLD CHURCH

by Ellen Glasgow

     To my sister Cary Glasgow McCormack
     In loving acknowledgment of help
     and sympathy through the years

CONTENTS

     BOOK FIRST

     JORDAN'S JOURNEY


     Chapter

     I.     At Bottom's Ordinary
     II.    In Which Destiny Wears the Comic Mask
     III.   In Which Mr. Gay Arrives at His Journey's End
     IV.    The Revercombs
     V.     The Mill
     VI.    Treats of the Ladies' Sphere
     VII.   Gay Rushes Into a Quarrel and Secures a Kiss
     VIII.  Shows Two Sides of a Quarrel
     IX.    In Which Molly Flirts
     X.     The Reverend Orlando Mullen Preaches a Sermon
     XI.    A Flight and an Encounter
     XII.   The Dream and the Real
     XIII.  By the Mill-race
     XIV.   Shows the Weakness in Strength
     XV.    Shows the Tyranny of Weakness
     XVI.   The Coming of Spring
     XVII.  The Shade of Mr. Jonathan
     XVIII. The Shade of Reuben
     XIX.   Treats of Contradictions
     XX.    Life's Ironies
     XXI.   In Which Pity Masquerades as Reason


     BOOK SECOND

     THE CROSS-ROADS


     Chapter

     I.    In which Youth Shows a Little Seasoned
     II.   The Desire of the Moth
     III   Abel Hears Gossip and Sees a Vision
     IV.   His Day of Freedom
     V.    The Shaping of Molly
     VI.   In Which Hearts Go Astray
     VII.  A New Beginning to an Old Tragedy
     VIII. A Great Passion in a Humble Place
     IX.   A Meeting in the Pasture
     X.    Tangled Threads
     XI.   The Ride to Piping Tree
     XII.  One of Love's Victims
     XIII. What Life Teaches
     XIV.  The Turn of the Wheel
     XV.   Gay Discovers Himself
     XVI.  The End

     Author's Note:  The scene of this story is not the
     place of the same name in Virginia.



BOOK FIRST

JORDAN'S JOURNEY

THE MILLER OF OLD CHURCH



CHAPTER I


AT BOTTOM'S ORDINARY


It was past four o'clock on a sunny October day, when a stranger, who
had ridden over the "corduroy" road between Applegate and Old Church,
dismounted near the cross-roads before the small public house known to
its frequenters as Bottom's Ordinary. Standing where the three roads
meet at the old turnpike-gate of the county, the square brick building,
which had declined through several generations from a chapel into a
tavern, had grown at last to resemble the smeared face of a clown under
a steeple hat which was worn slightly awry. Originally covered with
stucco, the walls had peeled year by year until the dull red of the
bricks showed like blotches of paint under a thick coating of powder.
Over the wide door two little oblong windows, holding four damaged
panes, blinked rakishly from a mat of ivy, which spread from the rotting
eaves to the shingled roof, where the slim wooden spire bent under the
weight of creeper and innumerable nesting sparrows in spring. After
pointing heavenward for half a century, the steeple appeared to have
swerved suddenly from its purpose, and to invite now the attention of
the wayfarer to the bar beneath. This cheerful room which sprouted, like
some grotesque wing, from the right side of the chapel, marked not only
a utilitarian triumph in architecture, but served, on market days to
attract a larger congregation of the righteous than had ever stood up
to sing the doxology in the adjoining place of worship. Good and bad
prospects were weighed here, weddings discussed, births and deaths
recorded in ever-green memories, and here, also, were reputations
demolished and the owners of them hustled with scant ceremony away to
perdition.

From the open door of the bar on this particular October day, there
streamed the ruddy blaze of a fire newly kindled from knots of resinous
pine. Against this pleasant background might be discerned now and then
the shapeless silhouette of Betsey Bottom, the innkeeper, a soft and
capable soul, who, in attaching William Ming some ten years before, had
successfully extinguished his identity without materially impairing her
own. Bottom's Ordinary had always been ruled by a woman, and it would
continue to be so, please God, however loudly a mere Ming might protest
to the contrary. In the eyes of her neighbours, a female, right or
wrong, was always a female, and this obvious fact, beyond and above any
natural two-sided jars of wedlock, sufficed in itself to establish Mrs.
Ming as a conjugal martyr. Being an amiable body--peaceably disposed to
every living creature, with the exception of William--she had hastened
to the door to reprimand him for some trivial neglect of the grey mule,
when her glance lighted upon the stranger, who had come a few minutes
earlier by the Applegate road. As he was a fine looking man of full
habit and some thirty years, her eyes lingered an instant on his face
before she turned with the news to her slatternly negro maid who was
sousing the floor with a bucket of soapsuds.

"Thar's nobody on earth out thar but young Mr. Jonathan Gay come back to
Jordan's Journey," she said. "I declar I'd know a Gay by his eyes if I
war to meet him in so unlikely a place as Kingdom Come. He's talkin'
to old Adam Doolittle now," she added, for the information of the maid,
who, being of a curious habit of mind, had raised herself on her knees
and was craning her neck toward the door, "I can see his lips movin',
but he speaks so low I can't make out what he says."

"Lemme git dar a minute, Miss Betsey, I'se got moughty sharp years, I
is."

"They're no sharper than mine, I reckon, and I couldn't hear if I stood
an' listened forever. It's about the road most likely, for I see old
Adam a-pintin'."

For a minute after dismounting the stranger looked dubiously at the
mottled face of the tavern. On his head the sunlight shone through
the boughs of a giant mulberry tree near the well, and beyond this the
Virginian forest, brilliant with its autumnal colours of red and copper,
stretched to the village of Applegate, some ten or twelve miles to the
north.

Starting southward from the cross-roads, the character of the country
underwent so sudden a transformation that it looked as if man, having
contended here unsuccessfully with nature, had signed an ignominious
truce beneath the crumbling gateposts of the turnpike. Passing beyond
them a few steps out of the forest, one found a low hill, on which
the reaped corn stood in stacks like weapons of a vanished army, while
across the sunken road, the abandoned fields, overgrown with broomsedge
and life-everlasting, spread for several miles between "worm fences"
which were half buried in brushwood. To the eyes of the stranger, fresh
from the trim landscapes of England, there was an aspect of desolation
in the neglected roads, in the deserted fields, and in the dim grey
marshes that showed beyond the low banks of the river.

In the effort to shake off the depression this loneliness had brought
on his spirits, he turned to an ancient countryman, wearing overalls
of blue jeans, who dozed comfortably on the circular bench beneath the
mulberry tree.

"Is there a nearer way to Jordan's Journey, or must I follow the
turnpike?" he asked.

"Hey? Young Adam, are you thar, suh?"

Young Adam, a dejected looking youth of fifty years, with a pair of
short-sighted eyes that glanced over his shoulder as if in fear of
pursuit, shuffled round the trough of the well, and sat down on the
bench at his parent's side.

"He wants to know, pa, if thar's a short cut from the ornary over to
Jordan's Journey," he repeated.

Old Adam, who had sucked patiently at the stem of his pipe during the
explanation, withdrew it at the end, and thrust out his lower lip as a
child does that has stopped crying before it intended to.

"You can take a turn to the right at the blazed pine a half a mile on,"
he replied, "but thar's the bars to be pulled down an' put up agin."

"I jest come along thar, an' the bars was down," said young Adam.

"Well, they hadn't ought to have been," retorted old Adam, indignantly.
"Bars is bars whether they be public or private, an' the man that pulls
'em down without puttin' 'em up agin, is a man that you'll find to be
loose moraled in other matters."

"It's the truth as sure as you speak it, Mr. Doolittle," said a wiry,
knocked-kneed farmer, with a hatchet-shaped face, who had sidled up to
the group. "It warn't no longer than yesterday that I was sayin' the
same words to the new minister, or rector as he tries to get us to call
him, about false doctrine an' evil practice. 'The difference between
sprinklin' and immersion ain't jest the difference between a few drips
on the head an' goin' all under, Mr. Mullen,' I said, 'but 'tis the
whole difference between the natur that's bent moral an' the natur that
ain't.' It follows as clear an' logical as night follows day--now, I ax
you, don't it, Mr. Doolittle--that a man that's gone wrong on immersion
can't be trusted to keep his hands off the women?"

"I ain't sayin' all that, Solomon Hatch," responded old Adam, in a
charitable tone, "seein' that I've never made up my own mind quite clear
on those two p'ints--but I do say, be he immersed or sprinkled, that
the man who took down them bars without puttin' 'em up ain't a man to be
trusted."

"'Twarn't a man, 'twas a gal," put in young Adam, "I seed Molly
Merryweather goin' toward the low grounds as I come up."

"Then it's most likely to have been she," commented Solomon, "for she is
a light-minded one, as is proper an' becomin' in a child of sin."

The stranger looked up with a laugh from the moss-grown cattle
trough beside which he was standing, and his eyes--of a peculiar dark
blue--glanced merrily into the bleared ones of old Adam.

"I ain't so blind yet as not to know a Gay when I see one," said the
labourer, with a sly chuckle. "If I hadn't closed the eyes of old Mr.
Jonathan when he was found dead over yonder by the Poplar Spring, I'd as
soon as not take my Bible oath that he'd come young agin an' was ridin'
along back to Jordan's Journey."

"Do you believe down here that my uncle killed himself?" asked the young
man, with a furtive displeasure in his voice, as if he alluded to a
disagreeable subject in response to some pressure of duty.

"'Tis as it may be, suh, I can't answer for that. To this day if you get
Solomon Hatch or Betsey Bottom, (axin' her pardon for puttin' her last),
started on the subject they'll contend till they're blue in the face
that 'twas naught done but pure murder. However, I'm too old at my time
of life to take up with any opinion that ain't pleasant to think
on, an', when all's said an' done, pure murder ain't a peaceable,
comfortable kind of thing to believe in when thar's only one Justice of
the Peace an' he bed-ridden since Christmas. When you ax me to pin my
faith on any p'int, be it for this world or the next, my first question
consarnin' it is whether that particular p'int happens to be pleasant.
'Tis that little small argyment of mine that has confounded Mr. Mullen
more than once, when he meets me on equal ground outside the pulpit.
'Mebbe 'tis an' mebbe 'tisn't,' as I remarked sociably to him about the
matter of eternal damnation, 'but you can't deny, can you, suh, bein'
outside the pulpit an' bound to speak the truth like the rest of us,
that you sleep a long sight easier in yo' bed when you say to yo'self
that mebbe 'tisn't?'"

"You see pa's old, an' he won't harbour any belief at his time of
life that don't let him rest comfortable," remarked young Adam, in an
apologetic aside. "It's that weakness of his that keeps him from bein' a
thorough goin' good Christian."

"That strange young clergyman has stirred us all up about the
doctrines," said Solomon Hatch. "He's opened Old Church agin, an' he
works terrible hard to make us feel that we'd rather be sprinkled on the
head than go under all over. A nice-mannered man he is, with a pretty
face, an' some folks hold it to be a pity that we can't change our ideas
about baptism and become Episcopals in our hearts, jest to oblige him.
The women have, mostly, bein' an accommodatin' sex in the main, with the
exception of Mrs. Mallory, the blacksmith's mother, who declars she'd
rather give up eternal damnation any day than immersion."

"I ain't goin' so fur as that," rejoined old Adam, "an' mo'over, when
it comes to the p'int, I've never found any uncommon comfort in either
conviction in time of trouble. I go to Mr. Mullen's church regular every
Sunday, seein' the Baptist one is ten miles off an' the road heavy, but
in my opinion he's a bit too zealous to turn over the notions of the
prophets an' set up his own. He's at the age when a man knows everything
on earth an' generally knows it wrong."

"You see pa had been settin' on the anxious bench for forty years,"
explained young Adam, "an' when Mr. Mullen came, he took it away from
under him, so to speak, while he was still settin' on it."

"'Twas my proper place," said old Adam resentfully, "when it comes to
crops or the weather I am firm fixed enough in my belief, but in matters
of religion I hold with the onsartain."

"Only his powerful belief in the Devil an' all his works keeps him from
bein' a heathen," observed young Adam in awe-stricken pride. "Even Mr.
Mullen can't move him, he's so terrible set."

"Well, he ain't my Redeemer, though doubtless he'd be cast down if he
was to hear as I'd said so," chuckled the elder. "The over earnest, like
the women folk, are better not handled at all or handled techily. I'm
near blind as it is, but ain't that the man yonder leadin' his horse out
of the Applegate road?"

"'Taint the rector, but the miller," responded his son. "He's bringin'
over Mrs. Bottom's sack of meal on the back of his grey mare."

"Ah, he's one of the folks that's gone over neck an' crop to the
Episcopals," said Solomon Hatch. "His folks have been Presbyterians over
at Piping Tree sence the time of Noah, but he recites the Creed now as
loud as he used to sing the doxology. I declar his voice boomed out so
in my ears last Sunday that I was obleeged to put up my hands to keep
'em from splittin'. Have you ever marked, Mr. Doolittle, havin' had the
experience of ninety years, that when a man once takes up with a heresy,
he shouts a heap louder than them that was born an' baptised in it? It
seems as if they can't desert the ancient ways without defying 'em as
well."

"'Tis so, 'tis so," admitted old Adam, wagging his head, "but Abel
Revercomb was al'ays the sort that could measure nothin' less than a
bushel. The pity with big-natured folk is that they plough up a mountain
and trip at last over a pea-vine!"

From the gloom and brightness of the Applegate road there emerged the
large figure of a young man, who led a handsome grey mare by the halter.
As he moved against the coloured screen of the leaves something of the
beauty of the desolate landscape showed in his face--the look of almost
autumnal sadness that one finds, occasionally, in the eyes of the
imaginative rustic. He wore a pair of sheepskin leggins into which the
ends of his corduroy trousers were stuffed slightly below the knees. His
head was bare, and from the open neck of his blue flannel shirt, faded
from many washings, the muscles in his throat stood out like cords in
the red-brown flesh. From his uncovered dark hair to his heavy boots, he
was powdered with the white dust of his mill, the smell of which floated
to the group under the mulberry tree as he passed up the walk to the
tavern.

"I lay he seed Molly Merryweather comin' up from the low grounds,"
remarked Solomon, when the young man had moved out of earshot.

