THE YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Lybarger and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



THE BEST SHORT STORIES OF 1921

AND THE

YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY

Edited by

EDWARD J. O'BRIEN

Editor of "The Best Short Stories of 1915"
"The Best Short Stories of 1916"
"The Best Short Stories of 1917"
"The Best Short Stories of 1918"
"The Best Short Stories of 1919"
"The Best Short Stories of 1920"
"The Great Modern English Stories," Etc







Boston
Small, Maynard & Company
Publishers

Copyright, 1920, by John T. Frederick, Charles J. Finger, The Dial
Publishing Company, Inc., Charles Scribner's Sons, The International
Magazine Company, Harper & Brothers, and Smart Set Company, Inc.

Copyright, 1921, by The Boston Transcript Company.

Copyright, 1921, by B.W. Huebsch, The Century Company, John T.
Frederick, George H. Doran Company, The Dial Publishing Company, Inc.,
The Pictorial Review Company, The Curtis Publishing Company, The Crowell
Publishing Company, Harper & Brothers, Charles Scribner's Sons, The
International Magazine Company, and Smart Set Company, Inc.

Copyright, 1921, by Boni & Liveright, Inc.

Copyright, 1922, by Maxwell Struthers Burt, George H. Doran Co., Lincoln
Colcord, Waldo Frank, Katharine Fullerton Gerould, Doubleday, Page &
Co., Glasgow, Susan Glaspell Cook, Richard Matthews Hallet, Frances
Noyes Hart, Fannie Hurst, Manuel Komroff, Frank Luther Mott, Vincent
O'Sullivan, Wilbur Daniel Steele, Harriet Maxon Thayer, Charles Hanson
Towne, and Mary Heaton Minor.

Copyright, 1922, by Small, Maynard & Company, Inc.

Printed in the United States of America
Press of the Murray Printing Company
Kendall Square, Cambridge





TO A.E. COPPARD




BY WAY OF ACKNOWLEDGMENT


Grateful acknowledgment for permission to include the stories and other
material in this volume is made to the following authors, editors and
publishers:

To the Editor of _The Century Magazine_, the Editor of _The Bookman_,
the Editor of _The Dial_, the Editor of _The Pictorial Review_, the
Editor of _The Saturday Evening Post_, the Editor of _The American
Magazine_, the Editor of _Scribner's Magazine_, the Editor of _Good
Housekeeping_, the Editor of _Harper's Magazine_, the Editor of _The
Cosmopolitan_, the Editors of _The Smart Set_, The Editor of _The
Midland_, Boni & Liveright, Inc., George H. Doran Co., B.W. Huebsch,
Doubleday, Page & Co., Sherwood Anderson, Konrad Bercovici, Maxwell
Struthers Burt, Irvin S. Cobb, Lincoln Colcord, Charles J. Finger, Waldo
Frank, Katharine Fullerton Gerould, Ellen Glasgow, Susan Glaspell,
Richard Matthews Hallet, Frances Noyes Hart, Fannie Hurst, Manuel
Komroff, Frank Luther Mott, Vincent O'Sullivan, Wilbur Daniel Steele,
Harriet Maxon Thayer, Charles Hanson Towne, and Mary Heaton Vorse.

Acknowledgments are specially due to _The Boston Evening Transcript_ for
permission to reprint the large body of material previously published in
its pages.


I shall be grateful to my readers for corrections, and particularly for
suggestions leading to the wider usefulness of this annual volume. In
particular, I shall welcome the receipt, from authors, editors, and
publishers, of stories printed during the period between October, 1921
and September, 1922 inclusive, which have qualities of distinction and
yet are not printed in periodicals falling under my regular notice. Such
communications may be addressed to me at _Forest Hill, Oxfordshire,
England_.

E.J.O.




CONTENTS[1]


                                                           PAGE

INTRODUCTION. By the Editor.                                xii

BROTHERS. By Sherwood Anderson.                               3
  (From _The Bookman_)

FANUTZA. By Konrad Bercovici.                                13
  (From _The Dial_)

EXPERIMENT. By Maxwell Struthers Burt.                       28
  (From _The Pictorial Review_)

DARKNESS. By Irvin S. Cobb.                                  52
  (From _The Saturday Evening Post_)

AN INSTRUMENT OF THE GODS. By Lincoln Colcord.               82
  (From _The American Magazine_)

THE LIZARD GOD. By Charles J. Finger.                       109
  (From _All's Well_)

UNDER THE DOME. By Waldo Frank.                             130
  (From _The Dial_)

FRENCH EVA. By Katharine Fullerton Gerould.                 142
  (From _Scribner's Magazine_)

THE PAST. By Ellen Glasgow.                                 168
  (From _Good Housekeeping_)

HIS SMILE. By Susan Glaspell.                               194
  (From _The Pictorial Review_)

THE HARBOR MASTER. By Richard Matthews Hallet.              207
  (From _Harper's Magazine_)

GREEN GARDENS. By Frances Noyes Hart.                       240
  (From _Scribner's Magazine_)

SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY. By Fannie Hurst.                       253
  (From _The Cosmopolitan_)

THE LITTLE MASTER OF THE SKY. By Manuel Komroff.            288
  (From _The Dial_)

THE MAN WITH THE GOOD FACE. By Frank Luther Mott.           300
  (From _The Midland_)

MASTER OF FALLEN YEARS. By Vincent O'Sullivan.              321
  (From _The Smart Set_)

THE SHAME DANCE. By Wilbur Daniel Steele.                   337
  (From _Harper's Magazine_)

KINDRED. By Harriet Maxon Thayer.                           362
  (From _The Midland_)

SHELBY. By Charles Hanson Towne.                            386
  (From _The Smart Set_)

THE WALLOW OF THE SEA. By Mary Heaton Vorse.                401
  (From _Harper's Magazine_)

THE YEARBOOK OF THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY,
OCTOBER, 1920, TO SEPTEMBER, 1921                           419

  Addresses of American and English Magazines
      Publishing Short Stories.                             421

  The Biographical Roll of Honor of American Short Stories. 424

  The Roll of Honor of Foreign Short Stories
      in American Magazines.                                428

  The Best Books of Short Stories: A Critical Summary.      430

  Volumes of Short Stories Published in the United
      States: An Index.                                     437

  Volumes of Short Stories Published in England and
      Ireland Only.                                         440

  Volumes of Short Stories Published in France.             442

  Articles on the Short Story: An Index.                    443

  Index of Short Stories in Books.                          457

      I. American Authors.                                  458

     II. English and Irish Authors.                         461

    III. Translations.                                      463

  Magazine Averages.                                        466

  Index of Short Stories Published in American Magazines.   469

      I. American Authors.                                  471

     II. English and Irish Authors.                         500

    III. Translations.                                      505




INTRODUCTION


I was talking the other day to Alfred Coppard, who has steered more
successfully than most English story writers away from the Scylla and
Charybdis of the modern artist. He told me that he had been reading
several new novels and volumes of short stories by contemporary American
writers with that awakened interest in the civilization we are framing
which is so noticeable among English writers during the past three
years. He asked me a remarkable question, and the answer which I gave
him suggested certain contrasts which seemed to me of basic importance
for us all. He said: "I have been reading books by Sherwood Anderson,
Waldo Frank and Ben Hecht and Konrad Bercovici and Joseph Hergesheimer,
and I can see that they are important books, but I feel that the
essential point to which all this newly awakened literary consciousness
is tending has somehow subtly eluded me. American and English writers
both use the same language, and so do Scotch and Irish writers, but I am
not puzzled when I read Scotch and Irish books as I am when I read these
new American books. Why is it?"

I had to think for a moment, and then the obvious answer occurred to me.
I told him that I thought the reason for his moderate bewilderment was
due to the fact that the Englishman or the Scotchman or the Irishman
living at home was writing out of a background of racial memory and
established tradition which was very much all of one piece, and that all
such an artist's unspoken implications and subtleties could be easily
taken for granted by his readers, and more or less thoroughly
understood, because they were elements in harmony with a tolerably fixed
and ordered world.

I added that this was more or less true of the American writer up to a
date roughly coinciding with that of the Chicago World's Fair in 1892.
During the thirty years more or less which have elapsed since that date,
there has been an ever widening seething maelstrom of cross currents
thrusting into more and more powerful conflict from year to year the
contributory elements brought to a new potential American culture by the
dynamic creative energies, physical and spiritual, of many races.

My suggestion to Mr. Coppard was that gradually the Anglo-Saxon, to take
the most readily understandable instance, was beginning to absorb large
tracts of many other racial fields of memory, and to share the
experience of Scandinavian and Russian and German and Italian, of Polish
and Irish and African and Asian members of the body politic, and that
all these widening tracts of remembered racial experience interacting
upon one another under the tremendous pressure of our nervous, keen, and
eager industrial civilization had set up a new chaos in many creative
minds. I said that Mr. Anderson and the others, half consciously and
half unconsciously, were trying to create worlds out of each separate
chaos, living dangerously, as Nietzsche advised, and fusing their
conceptions at a certain calculated temperature in artistic crucibles of
their own devising.

Mr. Coppard said that he quite saw that, but added that the particular
meaning in each case more or less escaped him. And then I ventured to
suggest that these meanings were more important for Americans at the
present stage than for Europeans, because American minds would grasp
readily at suggestions that harmonized with their own spiritual pasts,
and seize instinctive relations and congruities which had previously
escaped them in their experience, and so begin to formulate from these
books new intuitive laws. I suggested, moreover, that from the point of
view of the great artist these books were all more or less magnificent
failures which were creating, little by little, out of the shock of
conflict an ultimate harmony, out of which the great book for which we
are all waiting in America might come ten years from now, or five years,
or even tomorrow.

To this he replied that he felt I had supplied the clue which had
baffled him, and asked me if I did not discover a chaos of a different
sort in English life and literature since the armistice. I agreed that I
did discover such a chaos, but that it seemed to me a chaos which was an
end rather than a beginning, a chaos in which the Tower of Babel had
fallen, and men had come to babble with more and more complete
dissociation of ideas, or else, on the other hand, were clinging
desperately to such literary and social traditions as had been left,
while their work froze into a new Augustanism comparable to that of the
early years of the eighteenth century.

Next year, in conjunction with John Cournos, I shall begin in a parallel
series of volumes with the present series, to present my annual study of
the English case. Meanwhile, for the present, I deal once more with that
American chaos in which I have unbounded and ultimate faith. From now on
I should like to take as my motto almost the last paragraph written by
Walt Whitman before he died: "The Highest said: Don't let us begin so
low--isn't our range too coarse--too gross?--The Soul answer'd: No, not
when we consider what it is all for--the end involved in Time and
Space." Or, as the old Dutch flour-miller put it more briefly: "I never
bother myself what road the folks come--I only want good wheat and rye."

To repeat what I have said in these pages in previous years, for the
benefit of the reader as yet unacquainted with my standards and
principles of selection, I shall point out that I have set myself the
task of disengaging the essential human qualities in our contemporary
fiction which, when chronicled conscientiously by our literary artists,
may fairly be called a criticism of life. I am not at all interested in
formulæ, and organized criticism at its best would be nothing more than
dead criticism, as all dogmatic interpretation of life is always dead.
What has interested me, to the exclusion of other things, is the fresh,
living current which flows through the best American work, and the
psychological and imaginative reality which American writers have
conferred upon it.

No substance is of importance in fiction, unless it is organic
substance, that is to say, substance in which the pulse of life is
beating. Inorganic fiction has been our curse in the past, and bids fair
to remain so, unless we exercise much greater artistic discrimination
than we display at present.

The present record covers the period from October 1920, to September
1921, inclusive. During this period, I have sought to select from the
