



Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









THE ANCIENT LAW


BY

THE SAME AUTHOR

  THE WHEEL OF LIFE
  THE DELIVERANCE
  THE BATTLE-GROUND
  THE FREEMAN, AND OTHER POEMS
  THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE
  PHASES OF AN INFERIOR PLANET
  THE DESCENDANT




The Ancient Law

By

ELLEN GLASGOW

New York
Doubleday, Page & Company
1908

COPYRIGHT, 1908, BY
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
PUBLISHED, JANUARY, 1908

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES
INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

TO
MY GOOD FRIEND EFFENDI




CONTENTS


BOOK FIRST--THE NEW LIFE

CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

   I. The Road                                                         3

  II. The Night                                                       15

 III. The Return to Tappahannock                                      31

  IV. The Dream of Daniel Smith                                       42

   V. At Tappahannock                                                 54

  VI. The Pretty Daughter of the Mayor                                62

 VII. Shows the Graces of Adversity                                   72

VIII. "Ten Commandment Smith"                                         90

  IX. The Old and the New                                            101

   X. His Neighbour's Garden                                         111

  XI. Bullfinch's Hollow                                             123

 XII. A String of Coral                                              135

BOOK SECOND--THE DAY OF RECKONING

   I. In Which a Stranger Appears                                    147

  II. Ordway Compromises With the Past                               162

 III. A Change of Lodging                                            174

  IV. Shows That a Laugh Does not Heal a Heartache                   185

   V. Treats of a Great Passion in a Simple Soul                     196

  VI. In Which Baxter Plots                                          209

 VII. Shows That Politeness, Like Charity, Is an Elastic Mantle      222

VIII. The Turn of the Wheel                                          234

  IX. At the Cross-roads                                             248

   X. Between Man and Man                                            256

  XI. Between Man and Woman                                          268

BOOK THIRD--THE LARGER PRISON

   I. The Return to Life                                             281

  II. His Own Place                                                  290

 III. The Outward Pattern                                            303

  IV. The Letter and the Spirit                                      317

   V. The Will of Alice                                              329

  VI. The Iron Bars                                                  341

 VII. The Vision and the Fact                                        353

VIII. The Weakness in Strength                                       363

BOOK FOURTH--LIBERATION

   I. The Inward Light                                               379

  II. At Tappahannock Again                                          392

 III. Alice's Marriage                                               409

  IV. The Power of the Blood                                         420

   V. The House of Dreams                                            434

  VI. The Ultimate Choice                                            443

 VII. Flight                                                         454

VIII. The End of the Road                                            469

  IX. The Light Beyond                                               482




BOOK FIRST

THE NEW LIFE




CHAPTER I

THE ROAD


Though it was six days since Daniel Ordway had come out of prison, he
was aware, when he reached the brow of the hill, and stopped to look
back over the sunny Virginia road, that he drank in the wind as if it
were his first breath of freedom. At his feet the road dropped between
two low hills beyond which swept a high, rolling sea of broomsedge; and
farther still--where the distance melted gradually into the blue sky--he
could see not less plainly the New York streets through which he had
gone from his trial and the walls of the prison where he had served five
years. Between this memory and the deserted look of the red clay road
there was the abrupt division which separates actual experience from the
objects in a dream. He felt that he was awake, yet it seemed that the
country through which he walked must vanish presently at a touch. Even
the rough March wind blowing among the broomsedge heightened rather than
diminished the effect of the visionary meeting of earth and sky.

As he stood there in his ill-fitting clothes, with his head bared in the
sun and the red clay ground to fine dust on his coarse boots, it would
have been difficult at a casual glance to have grouped him
appropriately in any division of class. He might have been either a
gentleman who had turned tramp or a tramp who had been born to look a
gentleman. Though he was barely above medium height, his figure produced
even in repose an impression of great muscular strength, and this
impression was repeated in his large, regular, and singularly expressive
features. His face was square with a powerful and rather prominent mouth
and chin; the brows were heavily marked and the eyes were of so bright a
blue that they lent an effect which was almost one of gaiety to his
smile. In his dark and slightly coarsened face the colour of his eyes
was intensified until they appeared to flash at times like blue lights
under his thick black brows. His age was, perhaps, forty years, though
at fifty there would probably be but little change recorded in his
appearance. At thirty one might have found, doubtless, the same lines of
suffering upon his forehead and about his mouth.

As he went on over some rotting planks which spanned a stream that had
gone dry, the road he followed was visible as a faded scar in a stretch
of impoverished, neutral-toned country--the least distinctive and most
isolated part of what is known in Virginia as "the Southside." A
bleached monotony was the one noticeable characteristic of the
landscape--the pale clay road, the dried broomsedge, and even the
brownish, circular-shaped cloud of smoke, which hung over the little
town in the distance, each contributing a depressing feature to a face
which presented at best an unrelieved flatness of colour. The single
high note in the dull perspective was struck by a clump of sassafras,
which, mistaking the mild weather for a genial April, had flowered
tremulously in gorgeous yellow.

The sound of a wagon jolting over the rough road, reached him presently
from the top of the hill, and as he glanced back, he heard a drawling
curse thrown to the panting horses. A moment later he was overtaken by
an open spring wagon filled with dried tobacco plants of the last
season's crop. In the centre of the load, which gave out a stale,
pungent odour, sat a small middle-aged countryman, who swore mild oaths
in a pleasant, jesting tone. From time to time, as the stalks beneath
him were jostled out of place, he would shift his seat and spread out
his short legs clad in overalls of blue jean. Behind him in the road the
wind tossed scattered and damaged leaves of tobacco.

When the wagon reached Ordway, he glanced over his shoulder at the
driver, while he turned into the small grass-grown path amid the clumps
of sassafras.

"Is that Bernardsville over there?" he asked, pointing in the direction
of the cloud of smoke.

The wagon drew up quickly and the driver--who showed at nearer view to
be a dirty, red-bearded farmer of the poorer class--stared at him with
an expression which settled into suspicion before it had time to denote
surprise.

"Bernardsville! Why, you've come a good forty miles out of your road.
That thar's Tappahannock."

"Tappahannock? I hadn't heard of it."

"Mebbe you ain't, but it never knowed it."

"Anything going on there? Work, I mean?"

"The biggest shippin' of tobaccy this side o' Danville is goin' on thar.
Ever heard o' Danville?"

"I know the name, but the tobacco market is about closed now, isn't it?
The season's over."

The man's laugh startled the waiting horses, and lifting their heads
from a budding bush by the roadside, they moved patiently toward
Tappahannock.

"Closed? Bless you, it never closes--Whoa! thar, won't you, darn you? To
be sure sales ain't so brisk to-day as they war a month back, but I'm
jest carryin' in my leetle crop to Baxter's warehouse."

"It isn't manufactured, then--only bought and sold?"

"Oh, it's sold quick enough and bought, too. Baxter auctions the leaf
off in lots and it's shipped to the factories in Richmond an' in
Danville. You ain't a native of these parts, I reckon?"

"A native--no? I'm looking for work."

"What sort of work? Thar's work an' work. I saw a man once settin' out
in an old field doin' a picture of a pine tree, an' he called it work.
Wall, wall, if you're goin' all the way to Tappahannock, I reckon I kin
give you a lift along. Mebbe you kin pick up an odd job in Baxter's
warehouse--thar's a sayin' that he feeds all the crows in Tappahannock."

He drove on with a chuckle, for Ordway had declined the proffered
"lift," and the little cloud of dust raised by the wagon drifted slowly
in the direction of the town.

A mile farther on Ordway found that as the road approached Tappahannock,
the country lost gradually its aspect of loneliness, and the colourless
fields were dotted here and there with small Negro cabins, built for the
most part of unbarked pine logs laid roughly cross-wise to form square
enclosures. Before one of these primitive dwellings a large black woman,
with a strip of checked blue and white gingham bound about her head, was
emptying a pail of buttermilk into a wooden trough. When she saw Ordway
she nodded to him from the end of the little path, bordered by rocks,
which led from the roadside to the single stone step before her cabin
door.

As he watched the buttermilk splash into the trough, Ordway remembered,
with a spasm of faintness, that he had eaten nothing since the day
before, and turning out of the road, he asked the woman for a share of
the supper that she gave the pigs.

"Go 'way, honey, dis yer ain' fit'n fur you," she replied, resting the
pail under her arm against her rolling hip, "I'se des' thowin' hit ter
de hawgs."

But when he had repeated his request, she motioned to a wooden bench
beside a scrubby lilac bush on which a coloured shirt hung drying, and
going into the single room inside, brought him a glass of buttermilk and
a piece of corn bread on a tin plate. While he ate hungrily of the
coarse food a half-naked Negro baby, covered with wood ashes, rolled
across the threshold and lay sprawling in the path at his feet.

After a little rambling talk the woman went back into the cabin, where
she whipped up cornmeal dough in an earthenware bowl, turning at
intervals to toss a scrap or two to a red and white cock that hovered,
expectant, about the doorway. In the road a covered wagon crawled by,
and the shadow it threw stretched along the path to the lilac bush where
the coloured shirt hung drying. The pigs drank the buttermilk from the
trough with loud grunts; the red and white cock ventured, alert and
wary, across the threshold; and the Negro baby, after sprawling on its
stomach in the warm earth, rolled over and lay staring in silence at the
blue sky overhead.

There was little beauty in the scene except the beauty which belongs to
all things under the open sky. Road and landscape and cabin were bare
even of any chance effect of light and shadow. Yet there was life--the
raw, primal life of nature--and after his forty years of wasted
experience, Ordway was filled with a passionate desire for life. In his
careless pursuit of happiness he had often found weariness instead, but
sitting now homeless and penniless, before the negro's cabin, he
discovered that each object at which he looked--the long road that led
somewhere, the smoke hanging above the distant town, the deep-bosomed
negro mother and the half-naked negro baby--that each of these possessed
an interest to which he awakened almost with a start of wonder. And
yielding to the influence of his thought, his features appeared to lose
gradually their surface coarseness of line. It was as if his mouth grew
vague, enveloped in shadow, while the eyes dominated the entire face and
softened its expression to one of sweetness, gaiety and youth. The child
that is in every man big enough to contain it looked out suddenly from
his altered face.

He was thinking now of a day in his boyhood--of an early autumn morning
when the frost was white on the grass and the chestnuts dropped heavily
from the spreading boughs and the cider smelt strong and sweet as it
oozed from the crushed winesaps. On that morning, after dressing by
candlelight, he had gone into town with his maiden aunt, a lady whom he
remembered chiefly by her false gray curls which she wore as if they had
been a halo. At the wayside station, while they had waited for the train
to the little city of Botetourt, he had seen a convict brought in,
handcuffed, on his way to the penitentiary, and in response to the boy's
persistent questioning, his aunt had told him that the man was wicked,
though he appeared to the child's eyes to be only miserable--a thin,
