



Produced by Bryan Ness, Woodie4 and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)










  A FOREST HEARTH

  [Illustration: Publishers symbol]

  [Illustration: "HE PRODUCED A SMALL GOLD WATCH WITH THE WORD 'RITA'
  ENGRAVED UPON THE CASE."]




  A Forest Hearth

  A ROMANCE OF INDIANA IN THE THIRTIES

  BY

  CHARLES MAJOR

  AUTHOR OF "DOROTHY VERNON OF HADDON HALL," "THE BEARS OF BLUE RIVER,"
  "WHEN KNIGHTHOOD WAS IN FLOWER," ETC.


  _WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY CLYDE O. DELAND_

  New York

  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., LTD.

  1903

  _All rights reserved_



  COPYRIGHT, 1903,

  BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

  Set up, electrotyped, and published October, 1903.

  Norwood Press

  J. S. Cushing & Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.

  Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




CONTENTS




CHAPTER


                                                                  PAGE

     I.    ON THE HEART OF THE HEARTH                               11

    II.   THE BACHELOR HEART                                        27

   III.  THE SYCAMORE DIVAN                                         45

    IV.   THE DEBUTANTE                                             61

     V.    UNDER THE ELM CANOPY                                     87

    VI.   THE FIGHT BY THE RIVER SIDE                              107

   VII.  THE TRIAL                                                 133

  VIII. A CHRISTMAS HEARTH LOG                                     153

    IX.   DIC LENDS MONEY GRATIS                                   179

     X.    THE TOURNAMENT                                          203

    XI.   A KISS AND A DUEL                                        225

   XII.  THE LOVE POWDER                                           259

  XIII. THE DIMPLER                                                281

   XIV.  WISE MISS TOUSY                                           303

    XV.   THE CHRISTMAS GIFT                                       329




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                  PAGE

  "He produced a small gold watch with the word 'Rita'
     engraved upon the case"                           _Frontispiece_

  "She changed it many times"                                       31

  "She flung at the worthy shepherd the opprobrious words, 'You
     fool'"                                                         81

  "'I've come to get my kiss,' said Doug"                          121

  "Covering her face with her hands, she began to weep"            191

  "'Kill him, Dic; kill him as you would a wolf'"                  255

  "Miss Tousy softly kissed her and said, ... 'There, don't cry,
     sweet one'"                                                   315

  "'Here,' replied the girl"                                       349




ON THE HEART OF THE HEARTH




A Forest Hearth

CHAPTER I

ON THE HEART OF THE HEARTH


A strenuous sense of justice is the most disturbing of all virtues, and
those persons in whom it predominates are usually as disagreeable as
they are good. Any one who assumes the high plane of "justice to all,
and confusion to sinners," may easily gain a reputation for goodness
simply by doing nothing bad. Look wise and heavenward, frown severely
but regretfully upon others' faults, and the world will whisper, "Ah,
how good he is!" And you will be good--as the sinless, prickly pear. If
the virtues of omission constitute saintship, and from a study of the
calendar one might so conclude, seek your corona by the way of justice.
For myself, I would rather be a layman with a few active virtues and a
small sin or two, than a sternly just saint without a fault. Breed
virtue in others by giving them something to forgive. Conceive, if you
can, the unutterable horror of life in this world without a few blessed
human faults. He who sins not at all, cannot easily find reason to
forgive; and to forgive those who trespass against us, is one of the
sweetest benedictions of life. I have known many persons who built their
moral structure upon the single rock of justice; but they all bred
wretchedness among those who loved them, and made life harder because
they did not die young.

One woman of that sort, I knew,--Mrs. Margarita Bays. To her face, or in
the presence of those who might repeat my words, I of course called her
"Mrs. Bays"; but when I felt safe in so doing, I called her the "Chief
Justice"--a title conferred by my friend, Billy Little. Later happenings
in her life caused Little to christen her "my Lady Jeffreys," a
sobriquet bestowed upon her because of the manner in which she treated
her daughter, whose name was also Margarita.

The daughter, because she was as sweet as the wild rose, and as gentle
as the soft spring sun, received from her friends the affectionate
diminutive of Rita. And so I shall name her in this history.

Had not Rita been so gentle, yielding, and submissive, or had her
father, Tom Bays,--husband to the Chief Justice,--been more combative
and less amenable to the corroding influences of henpeck, I doubt if
Madam Bays would ever have attained a dignity beyond that of "Associate
Justice." That strong sense of domineering virtue which belongs to the
truly just must be fed, and it waxes fat on an easy-going husband and a
loving, tender daughter.

In the Bays home, the mother's righteous sense of justice and duty,
which applied itself relentlessly upon husband and daughter, became the
weakest sort of indulgence when dealing with the only son and heir.
Without being vicious, Tom, Jr., was what the negroes called "jes' clean
triflin'," and dominated his mother with an inherited club of inborn
selfishness. Before Tom's selfishness, Justice threw away her scales and
became maudlin sentiment.

I have been intimately acquainted with the Bays family ever since they
came to Blue River settlement from North Carolina, and I am going to
tell you the story of the sweetest, gentlest nature God has ever given
me to know--Rita Bays. I warn you there will be no heroics in this
history, no palaces, no grand people--nothing but human nature, the
forests, and a few very simple country folk indeed.

Rita was a babe in arms when her father, her mother, and her
six-year-old brother Tom moved from North Carolina in two great
"schooner" wagons, and in the year '20 or '21 settled upon Blue River,
near the centre of a wilderness that had just been christened "Indiana."

The father of Tom Bays had been a North Carolina planter of considerable
wealth and culture; but when the old gentleman died there were eight
sons and two daughters among whom his estate was to be divided, and some
of them had to choose between moving west and facing the terrors of
battle with nature in the wilderness, and remaining in North Carolina to
become "poor white trash." Tom Bays, Sr., had married Margarita,
daughter of a pompous North Carolinian, Judge Anselm Fisher. Whether he
was a real judge, or simply a "Kentucky judge," I cannot say; but he was
a man of good standing, and his daughter was not the woman to endure the
loss of caste at home. If compelled to step down from the social
position into which she had been born, the step must be taken among
strangers, that part at least of her humiliation might be avoided.

With a heart full of sorrow and determination, Madam Bays, who even then
had begun to manifest rare genius for leadership, loaded two "schooners"
with her household goods, her husband, her son, and her daughter, and
started northwest with the laudable purpose of losing herself in the
wilderness. They carried with them their inheritance, a small bag of gold,
and with it they purchased from the government a quarter-section--one
hundred and sixty acres--of land, at five shillings per acre. The land
on Blue was as rich and fertile as any the world could furnish; but for
miles upon miles it was covered with black forests, almost impenetrable to
man, and was infested by wild beasts and Indians. Here madam and her
husband began their long battle with the hardest of foes--nature; and
that battle, the terrors of which no one can know who has not fought it,
doubtless did much to harden the small portion of human tenderness with
which God had originally endowed her. They built their log-cabin on the
east bank of Blue River, one mile north of the town of the same name.
The river was spoken of simply as Blue.

Artistic beauty is not usually considered an attribute of log-cabins;
but I can testify to the beauty of many that stood upon the banks of
Blue,--among them the house of Bays. The main building consisted of two
ground-floor rooms, each with a front door and a half-story room above.
A clapboard-covered porch extended across the entire front of the house,
which faced westward toward Blue. Back of the main building was a
one-story kitchen, and adjoining each ground-floor room was a huge
chimney, built of small logs four to six inches in diameter. These
chimneys, thickly plastered on the inside with clay, were built with a
large opening at the top, and widened downward to the fireplace, which
was eight or ten feet square, and nearly as high as the low ceiling of
the room. The purpose of these generous dimensions was to prevent the
wooden chimney from burning. The fire, while the chimney was new, was
built in the centre of the enormous hearth that the flames might not
touch the walls, but after a time the heat burnt the clay to the
hardness of brick, and the fire was then built against the back wall. By
pointing up the cracks, and adding a coat of clay now and then, the
walls soon became entirely fireproof, and a fire might safely be kindled
that would defy Boreas in his bitterest zero mood. An open wood fire is
always cheering; so our humble folk of the wilderness, having little
else to cheer them during the long winter evenings, were mindful to be
prodigal in the matter of fuel, and often burned a cord of wood between
candle-light and bedtime on one of their enormous hearths. A cord of
wood is better than a play for cheerfulness, and a six-foot back-log
will make more mirth than Dan Rice himself ever created. Economy did not
enter into the question, for wood was nature's chief weapon against her
enemies, the settlers; and the question was not how to save, but how to
burn it.

To this place Rita first opened the eyes of her mind. The girl's
earliest memories were of the cozy log-cabin upon the banks of the
limpid, gurgling creek. Green in her memory, in each sense of the word,
was the soft blue-grass lawn, that sloped gently a hundred yards from
the cabin, built upon a little rise in the bottom land, down to the
water's edge. Often when she was a child, and I a man well toward middle
life, did I play with the enchanting little elf upon the blue-grass
lawn, and drink the waters of perennial youth at the fountain of her
sweet babyhood. Vividly I remember the white-skinned sycamores, the
gracefully drooping elms, and the sweet-scented honey-locust that grew
about the cabin and embowered it in leafy glory. Even at this long
distance of time, when June is abroad, if I catch the odor of locust
blossoms, my mind and heart travel back on the wings of a moment, and I
hear the buzzing of the wild bees, the song of the meadow-lark, the
whistle of bob-white, and the gurgling of the creek--all blended into
one sweet refrain like the mingling tones of a perfect orchestra by the
soft-voiced babble of my wee girl-baby friend. I close my eyes, and see
the house amid the hollyhocks and trees, a thin line of blue smoke
curling lazily from the kitchen chimney and floating away over the deep,
black forest to the north and east. I see the maples languidly turning
the white side of their leaves to catch the south wind's balmy breath,
and I see by my side a fate-charged, tiny tot, dabbling in the water,
mocking the songs of the birds, and ever turning her face, with its
great brown wistful eyes, to catch the breath of destiny and to hear the
sad dread hum of the future. But my old chum Billy Little was the
child's especial friend.

In those good times there was another child, a boy, Diccon Bright, who
often came down from his cabin home a mile up river to play with Rita on
the blue-grass lawn in summer, or to sit with her on the hearth log in
winter. In cold weather the hearth log was kept on one side of the
hearth, well within the fireplace itself, ready for use when needed. It
gloried in three names, all of which were redolent of home. It was
called the "hearth log" because it was kept upon the hearth; the
"waiting log" because it was waiting to take the place of the log that
was burning, and the "ciphering log" because the children sat upon it in
the evening firelight to do their "ciphering"--a general term used to
designate any sort of preparation for the morrow's lesson. In those
times arithmetic was the chief study, and from it the acquisition of all
branches of knowledge took the name of ciphering.

Diccon--where on earth his parents got the name, I cannot tell--was four
or five years older than Rita. He was a manly boy, and when my little
friend could hardly lisp his name she would run to him with the unerring
instinct of childhood and nestle in his arms or cling to his helpful
finger. The little fellow was so sturdy, strong, and brave, and his dark
gray eyes were so steadfast and true, that she feared no evil from him,
though ordinarily she was a timid child. She would sit by him on the
ciphering log during the long winter evenings, and the boy, the girl,
and the fire were the best of friends, and had glorious times together
on the heart of the cheery hearth. The north wind might blow, the snow
might snow, and the cold might freeze, Rita, Dic, and the fire cared not
a straw.

"I want no better mirror, my little sweetheart," he would say, "than
your brown eyes; no prettier color than your rosy cheeks and glossy
black hair, and no truer friend than your loving little heart." And the
fire crackled its entire approval.

"Very well, Dic," she would reply, laughing with delight, "if you really
want them, you may have them; they are all yours." And the fire smiled
rosily, beaming its benediction.

"But what will your father and mother say and Tom?" asked Dic.

"We'll not tell them," replied this tiny piece of Eve; and the fire
almost choked itself with spluttering laughter. So, with the fire as a
witness, the compact was made and remade many times, until she thought
she belonged to Dic and gloried in her little heart because of it.

Diccon and Rita's brother, Tom, even during their early childhood, when
they were hardly half so tall as the guns they carried, were companion
knights in the great wars waged by the settlers against the wild beasts
