

E-text prepared by Audrey Longhurst, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE TOUCHSTONE OF FORTUNE

Being the Memoir of Baron Clyde, who lived, thrived, and fell in the
Doleful Reign of the so-called Merry Monarch, Charles II

by

CHARLES MAJOR

Author of _When Knighthood Was In Flower_, etc.

1912







To My Wife




CHAPTER I

DAUGHTERS AND POVERTY


Goddess Fortune seems to delight in smiling on a man who risks his
all, including life, perhaps, on a desperate chance of, say one to one
hundred. If her Ladyship frowns and he loses, his friends call him a
fool; if he wins, they say he is a lucky devil and are pleased to share
his prosperity if he happens to be of a giving disposition. Lucky? No!
He has simply minted his courage.

The most remarkable illustration of these truths that has ever come to my
knowledge is my friend George Hamilton, the second son in this generation
of the illustrious House of Hamilton, Count Anthony being its present
head. The younger son was penniless save for the crumbs that fell from
his elder brother's table, and Count Anthony was one who kept an eye on
the crumbs.

George, who was of an independent nature, accepted Anthony's grudging
help reluctantly. Therefore when Charles II was restored to the English
throne in 1660, the younger Hamilton, who had been with the king in
exile, was glad to assume the duties of Second Gentleman of the
Bedchamber in Whitehall Palace. With the pension attached to this office,
winnings at cards and other uncertain revenues from disreputable sources,
George was enabled to maintain himself at court where debts were not
necessarily paid, where honesty and virtue were held in contempt, and
where vice of all sorts was not only the daily stock in trade but the
daily stock of jest and pleasure, boasting and pride; for what is the
use of being wicked if one hides one's light under a bushel?

Hamilton was a favorite with those who knew him well and was respected
by those who knew him slightly, not because of his virtues, for they were
few, but because he was strikingly handsome in person, moderately quick
of wit, generous to an enemy, kind to every one, brave to the point of
recklessness, and decent even in vice, if that be possible. He was no
better than his friends save in these easy qualities, but while he was as
bad in all other respects as his surroundings, the evil in him was due
more to environment than to natural tendencies, and the good--well, that
was his undoing, as this history will show. A man who attempts to 'bout
ship morally in too great haste is liable to miss stays and be swamped,
for nothing so grates on us as the sudden reformation of our friends,
while we remain unregenerate.

But to write Hamilton's history I must begin at the beginning, which
in this case happens to be my beginning, and shall conclude with his
"hundred to one" venture, which closed his career and mine, at least
in England.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Clydes, of whom I am the present head, have always had great respect
for the inevitable and have never permitted the idealization of a
hopeless cause to lead them into trouble solely for trouble's sake. So
it was that when my father of blessed memory saw that King Charles I and
his favorites were determined to wreck the state, themselves, and their
friends, he fell ill of the gout at an opportune moment, which made it
necessary for him to hasten to Germany to take the cure at the baths.

My revered father was the twenty-second Baron Clyde, Edwin by baptism,
and I, his namesake, am, or rather was, the twenty-third and last baron
of our line, having lost my title by reason of entanglement with the
desperate fortunes of George Hamilton.

My father had been a staunch supporter of Charles I, not only because
Charles was our divinely appointed king, but also because his Majesty
was a lovable person in many respects. His misfortunes were the result
of bad advice, false philosophy, and a heart too kind. Kindliness in a
king is a dangerous virtue, and a royal conscience is like a boil on
the elbow, always in the way. Aside from his kindliness there were only
two other qualities necessary to insure King Charles I the loss of his
head, and he possessed them--stubbornness and weakness. A good king need
have but two virtues, strength and love for his people, but if he would
reign comfortably, these virtues must be supplemented by a strenuous
vice,--sure death to his enemies.

So when my father saw that fidelity to King Charles's hopeless cause
meant hopeless ruin, he took the gout and went to Germany. Absence from
England enabled him to desert the cause he loved, but could not help,
and more, it saved him the humiliation of being compelled to join the
Cromwell forces,--a cause which he could have helped, but hated.
Therefore he saw to it that his gout remained with him during the entire
Cromwell interregnum, and he died at Aix-la-Chapelle just before the
recall of Charles II to the English throne.

I inherited my father's title and a part of his estate; a great portion
of the latter having been granted to the accommodating husband of one of
Charles II's friends.

I returned to England with the king, and, as balm to my wounded estate,
was made Second Gentleman of the Wardrobe in that modern Sodom, Whitehall
Palace, Westminster, where lived Charles II, who was said to have been
appointed and anointed of God, king of our glorious realm. God makes
some curious mistakes, if human opinion is to be accepted.

The name Lot was unknown in Whitehall, but Mesdames Potiphar, Salome, and
Delilah were met at every turn, while Davids and Johns, eager to be
tempted, and Samsons, stooping to be shorn, hedged the king about with
anything save divinity.

That interesting Frenchman, Comte de Grammont, is accredited with saying
that during his residence in England he knew but one woman in Whitehall
who was both beautiful and pure,--Frances Jennings, maid of honor to
her Grace, the Duchess of York, the Duke of York being James, brother of
Charles II, and heir presumptive to the English throne.

I am proud to say that this beautiful Frances Jennings was my mother's
brother's child. In early youth I had lived in her father's house and was
more her elder brother than her cousin.

I suppose De Grammont was wrong in his sweeping assertion, but he was
right in his judgment of Frances, for though she was admittedly the most
beautiful woman--perhaps I should say girl, for she was very young--at
court, she--. But what befell her is a part of George Hamilton's history
and shall be told all in its turn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frances Jennings and her younger sister Sarah, who afterwards became the
first duchess of the present House of Marlborough, were the daughters of
my uncle, Sir Richard Jennings, of Sundridge, near St. Albans. With a
fidelity more creditable to his heart than to his head, Sir Richard had
clung to the cause of Charles I, had lost his entire fortune, and in the
end was forced to bend his neck to the yoke of Cromwell to save his life.
When Charles II returned to the throne, he easily forgave Sir Richard his
enforced apostasy, but failed to return his estates, forgiveness being so
much easier than restitution to an indolent selfish nature.

So it was that at the time this story opens, which was several years
after King Charles's return, Sir Richard and his two daughters were
living almost in poverty at Sundridge, hoping for help from the king,
though little expecting it. Without assistance furnished by myself and a
former retainer of Sir Richard, one Roger Wentworth, who had become a
prosperous tanner of Sundridge, my cousins and my uncle would have been
reduced to want. But Wentworth and I kept up a meagre household, and I
was on watch at court to forward my uncle's interest, if by any good
fortune an opportunity should come. At last, after long waiting, it came,
though as often occurs with happiness delayed, it was mingled with
bitterness.

I think it was in the year 1662 or '63--it may have been a year or two
earlier or later, I cannot say at this distance of time--the Duchess of
York, who, with her husband, lived in Whitehall Palace with King Charles,
announced her intention of choosing her maids of honor by personal
inspection. She declared that, barring the fact that the maids must be of
good family, beauty would win the golden apple, as it had in olden
Greece. On hearing this news, I saw the opportunity for which I had
waited so long. If beauty was to be the test, surely my cousin Frances
would become a maid of honor, and once at court, if she could keep her
head and her heart, the fortunes of her house were sure to rise, for the
world has never known so good a beauty market as Whitehall was at that
time.

There was no question about my cousin's beauty. Would she be able to make
it bring a price worthy of its quality? To do this, she must have the
cunning of the serpent, the virtue of a saint, and the courage of Roland
himself. She must not be fastidious, though she must be suspicious. She
must not be a prude, though she must know that all is evil about her.
Lastly she must have no heart, though she must learn the rare art of
being tender to the right person at the right time.

I was sure that Frances was equipped with the mental and moral qualities
necessary in so dangerous a field as Whitehall Court. Among those
qualities was her knowledge that she was beautiful; not that she believed
it as a matter of vanity, but knew it simply as a matter of fact. That
knowledge would give her self-confidence and would help her to value
justly the flattery of men, which was sure to be her portion to
overflowing. She would know that flattery was her due, and therefore
would not be too grateful for it, gratitude being a dangerous virtue in
a woman. She was as dear to me as if she were my sister, and I hesitated
bringing her to terrible Whitehall. But desperate conditions need
desperate remedies, so I determined to lay the matter before my uncle and
let him and my cousins decide the question for themselves.

With this object in view, one bright spring morning, I took horse at the
Leg Tavern in King Street, Westminster, and rode to Sundridge to spend a
few days with my uncle, hoping to interest my beautiful cousin in the
Duchess of York's announcement concerning the choice of her maids. I knew
that Sir Richard would protest against Frances's going to Whitehall, but
I hoped, with the help of my cousins, to override the old gentleman's
feeble will. While I saw clearly the dangers the girl would encounter; I
had faith in her strength, and felt sure the chances of making her
fortune were worth the risk. In other words, I was staking a human soul
which was infinitely dear to me, against wealth and station--a hundred to
one chance, even with the Fates smiling. When one considers how seldom
the long odds are taken and how often they win, one cannot help believing
that courage is the touchstone of Fortune; the criterion by which the
capricious Goddess measures her votaries and distributes her smiles.

I made my journey to Sundridge and arrived there in the afternoon near
the hour of three, finding my uncle and my cousin Sarah at home, but
Frances abroad.

"She walks a great deal nowadays," remarked my uncle, and Sarah assented
with--"Yes, a great deal," having, I fancied, more significance in her
manner than in her words.

"There has been hardly a pleasant afternoon in a month that she has not
been abroad with her book," continued Sir Richard.

"Her book," murmured Sarah, who was a laconic young person, much given to
observing conditions about her and equally prone to keep her conclusions
to herself.

"She refuses all company," remarked my uncle, who did not seem to catch
the sceptical inflection in his younger daughter's voice, "and I
sometimes fear she wishes to be alone because she is brooding over our
misfortunes."

"Brooding!" murmured Sarah, with slightly lifted eyebrows.

"Even when she is at home she sits all day long at the window and sighs,"
said Sir Richard, dolefully.

"Sighs," concurred laconic Sarah.

There are so many symptoms which, in a young woman, may seem to indicate
the disease of love that one making a hasty diagnosis is likely to fall
upon that malady, it being prevalent in spring, both of the year and of
life. I had believed that my cousin's healthful vanity and quiet strength
of character would, in a measure, keep her safe from this troublesome
spring disorder, but my uncle's account of her doings led me to fear that
perhaps her wholesome armor of self-conceit was not so invulnerable as
I had hoped.

Later I spoke my half-formed doubt to Sarah, who answered:--

"I don't know what she is doing. I attend to my own business; that is,
unless I see profit in meddling elsewhere."

"Ah, but this is your business and mine if we love your sister, as you
will say when you learn the object of my visit," I answered, hoping to
loosen her cautious tongue.

Sarah's eyes opened wide with a question in them, but her lips remained
sealed, and I would not satisfy her curiosity, which I knew was at
boiling-point, until she had made a direct request. Her manner had
resolved my doubts into fears, so as she did not speak, I continued:--

"But you must be able to form an opinion as to what your sister is doing.
You are with her all the time, and every young girl instinctively knows
the symptoms of love, even though she may never have felt them."

"Not I!" she answered, with sharp emphasis.

"Oh, but you may suspect or surmise," I insisted.

"Suspect sometimes. Surmise never. Waste of energy," answered Sarah, who,
of all the persons I knew, had energy to spare.

"It would be a crime, a horrible crime," I continued, hoping in time to
extract her opinion, "if your beautiful sister were to throw herself away
on any man to be met hereabout."

"Horrible!" acquiesced Sarah, earnestly.

"Then why don't you watch her, and, if need be, prevent such a mistake?"
I suggested.

"Not necessary," answered Sarah.

As she failed to explain, I asked, "Why is it not necessary?"

"Because she is not a fool," returned Sarah, indicating by her manner
that I might find her meaning if I could.

A moment's thought carried me to her conclusions, and I laughed because I
was answered and pleased, being convinced that Sarah, at least, did not
consider her sister in danger. Then I caught Sarah in my arms and kissed
her, saying:--

"A kiss! That's for wisdom, cousin!" Sarah's was a drawing personality.

"A slap! That's for impudence!" answered Sarah, suiting the action to the
word, though there was a smile in her eyes.

Later in the afternoon Frances came home radiant and offered me her cheek
to kiss. She was delighted to see me, though I noticed short lapses from
attention, which seemed to indicate preoccupation. But I had learned my
lesson from Sarah and soon came back to my belief that Frances was not a
fool, and that whatever malady her symptoms might indicate, she would
never permit it to inure her.

After talking with my uncle and my cousins a few minutes, I said: "I have
had a long ride and want a good supper Come, Frances, let us go out and
buy all the good things in Sundridge."

Sir Richard said nothing, and a faint shadow of humiliation came to
Frances's face, but practical Sarah settled the question by saying:--

"Go with him, Frances, and see that he buys enough. You know we have had
barely a crust in the house the last fortnight, and not a farthing in all
that time with which to buy one. We have a warm welcome for you, Baron
Ned, but welcome after a long ride is a mere appetizer. I'll fetch a
basket--yes, two!"

The name "Baron Ned" was a heritage from the days of my childhood, and
doubtless it will cling to me till the day of my death. I have never
objected to it on the lips of my friends, but rather, have always liked
it.

Sarah's good common sense set us all laughing, and when she brought in
two large baskets, Frances and I went forth to buy our supper.

When we were a short way from the house, I said: "I've come to spend
