

E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Jeannie Howse, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 17498-h.htm or 17498-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/4/9/17498/17498-h/17498-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/4/9/17498/17498-h.zip)


   +--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | Transcriber's Note:                                          |
   |                                                              |
   | A number of obvious typographical errors have been corrected |
   | in this text. For a complete list, please see the bottom of  |
   | this document.                                               |
   |                                                              |
   +--------------------------------------------------------------+





WHEN KNIGHTHOOD WAS IN FLOWER

or, the Love Story of
Charles Brandon and Mary Tudor
the King's Sister, and Happening
in the Reign of
His August Majesty
King Henry the
Eighth

Rewritten and Rendered into Modern English from
Sir Edwin Caskoden's Memoir

by

EDWIN CASKODEN
[Charles Major]

Julia Marlowe Edition
With Scenes from the Play







[Illustration]




Indianapolis, U.S.A.
The Bowen-Merrill Company
Publishers
Copyright, Eighteen Hundred Ninety
Eight, and Nineteen Hundred One
by The Bowen-Merrill Company
Press of
Braunworth & Co.
Bookbinders and Printers
Brooklyn, N.Y.





    _"There lived a Knight, when Knighthood was in flow'r,
    Who charmed alike the tilt-yard and the bow'r_."




To My Wife




CONTENTS


      The Caskodens                                        1

    I The Duel                                             6

   II How Brandon Came to Court                           13

  III The Princess Mary                                   23

   IV A Lesson in Dancing                                 45

    V An Honor and an Enemy                               74

   VI A Rare Ride to Windsor                              89

  VII Love's Fierce Sweetness                            102

 VIII The Trouble in Billingsgate Ward                   128

   IX Put Not Your Trust in Princesses                   146

    X Justice, O King!                                   169

   XI Louis XII a Suitor                                 182

  XII Atonement                                          202

 XIII A Girl's Consent                                   213

  XIV In the Siren Country                               226

   XV To Make a Man of Her                               244

  XVI A Hawking Party                                    256

 XVII The Elopement                                      268

XVIII To the Tower                                       289

  XIX Proserpina                                         302

   XX Down into France                                   320

  XXI Letters from a Queen                               337

    _"Cloth of gold do not despise,
    Though thou be match'd with cloth of frize;
    Cloth of frize, be not too bold,
    Though thou be match'd with cloth of gold_."

  Inscription on a label affixed to Brandon's lance under a picture
  of Mary Tudor and Charles Brandon, at Strawberry Hill.






The Play


The initial performance of the play was given in St. Louis on the
evening of November 26, 1900, and the first New York production was on
the fourteenth of the following January.

Its instant and continued success is well known. A prominent dramatic
critic of the press has said:

"Julia Marlowe fully realized the popular idea of the Mary described
by the novelist. She seemed to revel in the role. With its
instantaneous changes from gay daring to anger and fear, from coyness
to the dignity that hedges a princess, from resentment to ardent love,
the part of Mary Tudor gives Julia Marlowe full scope for the display
of her talent. She has never appeared to better or as good advantage
as in this play for the reason that it gives opportunity for broader
and more effective lights and shades than anything she has hitherto
given us."




When Knighthood Was in Flower




When Knighthood Was in Flower....

_The Caskodens_


We Caskodens take great pride in our ancestry. Some persons, I know,
hold all that to be totally un-Solomonlike and the height of vanity,
but they, usually, have no ancestors of whom to be proud. The man who
does not know who his great-grandfather was, naturally enough would
not care what he was. The Caskodens have pride of ancestry because
they know both who and what.

Even admitting that it is vanity at all, it is an impersonal sort of
failing, which, like the excessive love of country, leans virtueward;
for the man who fears to disgrace his ancestors is certainly less
likely to disgrace himself. Of course there are a great many excellent
persons who can go no farther back than father and mother, who,
doubtless, eat and drink and sleep as well, and love as happily, as if
they could trace an unbroken lineage clear back to Adam or Noah, or
somebody of that sort. Nevertheless, we Caskodens are proud of our
ancestry, and expect to remain so to the end of the chapter,
regardless of whom it pleases or displeases.

We have a right to be proud, for there is an unbroken male line from
William the Conqueror down to the present time. In this lineal list
are fourteen Barons--the title lapsed when Charles I fell--twelve
Knights of the Garter and forty-seven Knights of the Bath and other
orders. A Caskoden distinguished himself by gallant service under the
Great Norman and was given rich English lands and a fair Saxon bride,
albeit an unwilling one, as his reward. With this fair, unwilling
Saxon bride and her long plait of yellow hair goes a very pretty,
pathetic story, which I may tell you at some future time if you take
kindly to this. A Caskoden was seneschal to William Rufus, and sat at
the rich, half barbaric banquets in the first Great Hall. Still
another was one of the doughty barons who wrested from John the Great
Charter, England's declaration of independence; another was high in
the councils of Henry V. I have omitted one whom I should not fail to
mention: Adjodika Caskoden, who was a member of the Dunce Parliament
of Henry IV, so called because there were no lawyers in it.

It is true that in the time of Edward IV a Caskoden did stoop to
trade, but it was trade of the most dignified, honorable sort; he was
a goldsmith, and his guild, as you know, were the bankers and
international clearance house for people, king and nobles. Besides, it
is stated on good authority that there was a great scandal wherein the
goldsmith's wife was mixed up in an intrigue with the noble King
Edward; so we learn that even in trade the Caskodens were of honorable
position and basked in the smile of their prince. As for myself, I am
not one of those who object so much to trade; and I think it
contemptible in a man to screw his nose all out of place sneering at
it, while enjoying every luxury of life from its profits.

This goldsmith was shrewd enough to turn what some persons might call
his ill fortune, in one way, into gain in another. He was one of those
happily constituted, thrifty philosophers who hold that even
misfortune should not be wasted, and that no evil is so great but the
alchemy of common sense can transmute some part of it into good. So he
coined the smiles which the king shed upon his wife--he being
powerless to prevent, for Edward smiled where he listed, and listed
nearly everywhere--into nobles, crowns and pounds sterling, and left a
glorious fortune to his son and to his son's son, unto about the
fourth generation, which was a ripe old age for a fortune, I think.
How few of them live beyond the second, and fewer still beyond the
third! It was during the third generation of this fortune that the
events of the following history occurred.

Now, it has been the custom of the Caskodens for centuries to keep a
record of events, as they have happened, both private and public. Some
are in the form of diaries and journals like those of Pepys and
Evelyn; others in letters like the Pastons'; others again in verse and
song like Chaucer's and the Water Poet's; and still others in the
more pretentious form of memoir and chronicle. These records we always
have kept jealously within our family, thinking it vulgar, like the
Pastons, to submit our private affairs to public gaze.

There can, however, be no reason why those parts treating solely of
outside matters should be so carefully guarded, and I have determined
to choose for publication such portions as do not divulge family
secrets nor skeletons, and which really redound to family honor.

For this occasion I have selected from the memoir of my worthy
ancestor and namesake, Sir Edwin Caskoden--grandson of the goldsmith,
and Master of the Dance to Henry VIII--the story of Charles Brandon
and Mary Tudor, sister to the king.

This story is so well known to the student of English history that I
fear its repetition will lack that zest which attends the development
of an unforeseen denouement. But it is of so great interest, and is so
full, in its sweet, fierce manifestation, of the one thing insoluble
by time, Love, that I will nevertheless rewrite it from old Sir
Edwin's memoir. Not so much as an historical narrative, although I
fear a little history will creep in, despite me, but simply as a
picture of that olden long ago, which, try as we will to put aside the
hazy, many-folded curtain of time, still retains its shadowy lack of
sharp detail, toning down and mellowing the hard aspect of real
life--harder and more unromantic even than our own--into the blending
softness of an exquisite mirage.

I might give you the exact words in which Sir Edwin wrote, and shall
now and then quote from contemporaneous chronicles in the language of
his time, but should I so write at all, I fear the pleasure of perusal
would but poorly pay for the trouble, as the English of the Bluff King
is almost a foreign tongue to us. I shall, therefore, with a few
exceptions, give Sir Edwin's memoir in words, spelling and idiom which
his rollicking little old shade will probably repudiate as none of his
whatsoever. So, if you happen to find sixteenth century thought
hob-nobbing in the same sentence with nineteenth century English, be
not disturbed; I did it. If the little old fellow grows grandiloquent
or garrulous at times--_he_ did that. If you find him growing
super-sentimental, remember that sentimentalism was the life-breath of
chivalry, just then approaching its absurdest climax in the bombastic
conscientiousness of Bayard and the whole mental atmosphere laden with
its pompous nonsense.




_CHAPTER I_

_The Duel_


It sometimes happens, Sir Edwin says, that when a woman will she
won't, and when she won't she will; but usually in the end the adage
holds good. That sentence may not be luminous with meaning, but I will
give you an illustration.

I think it was in the spring of 1509, at any rate soon after the death
of the "Modern Solomon," as Queen Catherine called her old
father-in-law, the late King Henry VII, that his august majesty Henry
VIII, "The Vndubitate Flower and very Heire of both the sayd Linages,"
came to the throne of England, and tendered me the honorable position
of Master of the Dance at his sumptuous court.

As to "worldly goods," as some of the new religionists call wealth, I
was very comfortably off; having inherited from my father, one of the
counselors of Henry VII, a very competent fortune indeed. How my
worthy father contrived to save from the greedy hand of that rich old
miser so great a fortune, I am sure I can not tell. He was the only
man of my knowledge who did it; for the old king had a reach as long
as the kingdom, and, upon one pretext or another, appropriated to
himself everything on which he could lay his hands. My father,
however, was himself pretty shrewd in money matters, having inherited
along with his fortune a rare knack at keeping it. His father was a
goldsmith in the time of King Edward, and enjoyed the marked favor of
that puissant prince.

Being thus in a position of affluence, I cared nothing for the fact
that little or no emolument went with the office; it was the honor
which delighted me. Besides, I was thereby an inmate of the king's
palace, and brought into intimate relations with the court, and above
all, with the finest ladies of the land--the best company a man can
keep, since it ennobles his mind with better thoughts, purifies his
heart with cleaner motives, and makes him gentle without detracting
from his strength. It was an office any lord of the kingdom might have
been proud to hold.

