

E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Matthew Wheaton, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illuminations.
      See 37975-h.htm or 37975-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/37975/37975-h/37975-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/37975/37975-h.zip)


      Project Gutenberg also has Volumes I and II of this
      work. See
      Volume I: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37973
      Volume II: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37974


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/dianatempest03chol





DIANA TEMPEST.

by

MARY CHOLMONDELEY,

Author of
"The Danvers Jewels,"
"Sir Charles Danvers," etc.

In Three Volumes.

VOL. III.







London:
Richard Bentley & Son,
Publishers in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen.
1893.
(All rights reserved.)




DIANA TEMPEST.




CHAPTER I.

     "Time and chance are but a tide."

     BURNS.


Between aspiration and achievement there is no great gulf fixed. God
does not mock His children by putting a lying spirit in the mouth of
their prophetic instincts. Only the faith of concentrated endeavour,
only the stern years which must hold fast the burden of a great hope,
only the patience strong and meek which is content to bow beneath "the
fatigue of a long and distant purpose;" only these stepping-stones, and
no gulf impassable by human feet, divide aspiration from achievement.

To aspire is to listen to the word of command. To achieve is to obey,
and to continue to obey, that voice. It is given to all to aspire. Few
allow themselves to achieve. John had begun to see that.

If he meant to achieve anything, it was time he put his hand to the
plough. He had listened and learned long enough.

"My time has come," he said to himself, as he sat alone in the library
at Overleigh on the first day of the new year. "I am twenty-eight. I
have been 'promising' long enough. The time of promise is past. I must
perform, or the time of performance will pass me by."

He knit his heavy brows.

"I must act," he said to himself, "and I cannot act. I must work, and I
cannot work."

John was conscious of having had--he still had--high ambitions, deep
enthusiasms. Yet lo! all his life seemed to hinge on the question
whether Di would become his wife. Who has not experienced, almost with a
sense of traitorship to his own nature, how the noblest influences at
work upon it may be caught up into the loom of an all-absorbing personal
passion, adding a new beauty and dignity to the fabric, but nevertheless
changing for the time the pattern of the life?

John's whole heart was set on one object. There is a Rubicon in the
feelings to pass which is to cut off retreat. John had long passed it.

"I cannot do two things at the same time," he said. "I will ask Mrs.
Courtenay and Di here for the hunt ball, and settle matters one way or
the other with Di. After that, whether I succeed or fail, I will throw
myself heart and soul into the career Lord ---- prophesies for me. The
general election comes on in the spring. I will stand then."

John wrote a letter to the minister who had such a high opinion of
him--or perhaps of his position--preserved a copy, pigeon-holed it, and
put it from his mind. His thoughts reverted to Di as a matter of course.
He had seen her several times since the fancy ball. Each particular of
those meetings was noted down in the unwritten diary which contains all
that is of interest in our lives, which no friend need be entreated to
burn at our departure.

He was aware that a subtle change had come about between him and Di;
that they had touched new ground. If he had been in love before--which,
of course, he ought to have been--he would have understood what that
change meant. As it was, he did not. No doubt he would be wiser next
time.

Yet even John, creeping mole-like through self-made labyrinths of
conjecture one inch below the surface, asked himself whether it was
credible that Di was actually beginning to care for him. When he knew
for certain she did not, there seemed no reason that she should not; now
that he was insane enough to imagine she might, he was aware of a
thousand deficiencies in himself which made it impossible. And yet----

So he wrote another letter, this time to Mrs. Courtenay, inviting her
and Di to the hunt ball in his neighbourhood, at the end of January.

And his invitation was accepted. And one if not two persons, perhaps
even a third old enough to know better, began the unprofitable task of
counting days.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an iron winter. It affected Fritz's health deleteriously. His
short legs raised him but little above the surface of the earth, and he
was subject to chills and cramps owing to the constant contact of the
under portion of his long ginger person with the snow. Not that there
was much snow. One steel and iron frost succeeded another. Lindo, on the
contrary, found the cold slight compared with the two winters which he
had passed in Russia with John. His wool had been allowed to grow, to
the great relief of Mitty, who could not "abide" the "bare-backed state"
which the exigencies of fashion required of him during the summer.

It was a winter not to be forgotten, a winter such as the oldest people
at Overleigh could hardly recall. As the days in the new year
lengthened, the frost strengthened, as the saying goes. The village beck
at Overleigh froze. By-and-by the great rivers froze. Carts went over
the Thames. Some one, fonder of driving than of horses, drove a
four-in-hand on the ice at Oxford. The long lake below Overleigh Castle,
which had formerly supplied the moat, was frozen feet thick. The little
islands and the boathouse were lapped in ice. It became barely possible,
as the days went on, to keep one end open for the swans and ducks. The
herons came to divide the open space with them. The great frost of
18-- was not one that would be quickly forgotten.

John kept open house, for the ice at Overleigh was the best in the
neighbourhood, and all the neighbours within distance thronged to it.
Mothers drove over with their daughters; for skating is a healthy
pursuit, and those that can't skate can learn.

The most inaccessible hunting men, rendered desperate like the herons by
the frost, turned up regularly at Overleigh to play hockey, or emulate
John's figure-skating, which by reason of long practice in Russia was
"bad to beat."

John was a conspicuous figure on the ice, in his furred Russian coat
lined with sable paws, in which he had skated at the ice carnivals at
St. Petersburg.

Mitty, with bright winter-apple cheeks and a splendid new beaver muff,
would come down to watch her darling wheel and sweep.

"If the frost holds I will have an ice carnival when Di is here," John
said to himself; and after that he watched the glass carefully.

The day of Di's arrival drew near, came, and actually Di with it. She
was positively in the house. Archie came the same day, but not with her.
Archie had invariably shown such a marked propensity for travelling by
any train except that previously agreed upon, when he was depended on to
escort his sister, that after a long course of irritation Mrs. Courtenay
had ceased to allow him to chaperon Di, to the disgust of that
gentleman, who was very proud of his ornamental sister when she was not
in the way, and who complained bitterly at not being considered good
enough to take her out. So Mrs. Courtenay, who had accepted for the sake
of appearances, but who had never had the faintest intention of leaving
her own fireside in such inhuman weather, discovered a tendency to
bronchitis, and failed at the last moment, confiding Di to the charge of
Miss Fane, who good-naturedly came down from London to assist John in
entertaining his guests.

And still the following day the frost held. The hunt ball had dwindled
to nothing in comparison with the ice carnival at Overleigh the night
following the ball. The whole neighbourhood was ringing with it. Such a
thing had never taken place within the memory of man at Overleigh. The
neighbours, the tenantry, cottagers and all, were invited. The
hockey-players rejoiced in the rumour that there would be hockey by
torchlight, with goals lit up by flambeaux and a phosphorescent bung.
Would the frost hold? That was the burning topic of the day.

There was a large house-party at Overleigh, a throng of people who in
Di's imagination existed only during certain hours of the day, and
melted into the walls at other times. They came and went, and skated and
laughed, and wore beautiful furs, especially Lady Alice Fane, but they
had no independent existence of their own. The only real people among
the crowd of dancing skating shadows were herself and John, with whom
all that first day she had hardly exchanged a word--to her relief, was
it, or her disappointment?

After tea she went up with Miss Fane to the low entresol room which had
been set apart for that lady's use, to help her to rearrange the men's
button-holes, which John had pronounced to be too large. As soon as Di
took them in hand, Miss Fane of course discovered, as was the case, that
she was doing them far better than she could herself, and presently
trotted off on the pretext of seeing to some older lady who did not want
seeing to, and did not return.

Di was not sorry. She rearranged the bunches of lilies of the valley at
leisure, glad of the quiet interval after a long and unprofitable day.

Presently the person of whom she happened to be thinking happened to
come in. He would have been an idiot if he had not, though I regret to
be obliged to chronicle that he had had doubts on the subject.

"I thought I should find Aunt Loo here," he said, rather guiltily, for
falsehood sat ungracefully upon him. And he looked round the apartment
as if she might be concealed in a corner.

"She was here a moment ago," said Di, and she began to sort the flowers
all over again.

"The frost shows no signs of giving."

"I am glad."

After the frost John found nothing further of equal originality to say,
and presently he sat down, neither near to her nor very far away, with
his chin in his hands, watching her wire her flowers. The shaded light
dealt gently with the folds of Di's amber tea-gown, and touched the
lowest ripple of her yellow hair. She dropped a single lily, and he
picked it up for her, and laid it on her knee. It was a day of little
things; the little things Love glorifies. He did not know that his
attitude was that of a lover--did not realize the inference he would
assuredly have drawn if he had seen another man sit as he was sitting
then. He had forgotten all about that. He thought of nothing; neither
thought of anything in the blind unspeakable happiness and comfort of
being near each other, and at peace with each other.

Afterwards, long afterwards, John remembered that hour with the feeling
as of a Paradise lost, that had been only half realized at the time. He
wondered how he had borne such happiness so easily; why no voice from
heaven had warned him to speak then, or hereafter for ever hold his
peace. And yet at the time it had seemed only the dawning of a coming
day, the herald of a more sure and perfect joy to be. The prophetic
conviction had been at the moment too deep for doubt that there would be
many times like that.

"Many times," each thought, lying awake through the short winter night
after the ball.

John had discovered that to be alternately absolutely certain of two
opposite conclusions, without being able to remain in either, is to be
in a state of doubt. He found he could bear that blister as ill as most
men.

"I will speak to her the morning after the carnival," he said, "when all
this tribe of people have gone. What is the day going to be like?"

He got up and unbarred his shutter, and looked out. The late grey
morning was shivering up the sky. The stars were white with cold. The
frost had wrought an ice fairyland on the lattice. While that fragile
web held against the pane, the frost that wrapped the whole country
would hold also.




CHAPTER II.

     "A funeral morn is lit in heaven's hollow,
     And pale the star-lights follow."

     CHRISTINA ROSSETTI.


Towards nine o'clock in the evening carriage after carriage began to
drive up to Overleigh in the moonlight. When Di came down, the white
stone hall and the music-room were already crowded with guests, among
whom she recognized Lord Hemsworth, Mr. Lumley, and Miss Crupps, who had
been staying at houses in the neighbourhood for the hunt ball the night
before, and had come on with their respective parties, to the not
unmixed gratification of John.

"Here we are again," said Mr. Lumley, flying up to her. "No favouritism,
I beg, Miss Tempest. Tempest shall carry one skate, and I will take the
other. Hemsworth must make himself happy with the button-hook. Great
heavens! Tempest, whose funeral have you been ordering?"

For at that moment the alarm-bell of the Castle began to toll.

"It is unnecessary to hide in the curtains," said John. "That bell is
only rung in case of fire. It is the signal for lighting up."

And, headed by a band of torches, the whole party went streaming out of
the wide archway, a gay crowd of laughing expectant people, into the
gardens, where vari-coloured lines of lights gleamed terrace below
terrace along the stone balustrades, and Neptune reined in his dolphins
in the midst of his fountain, in a shower of golden spray.

The path down to the lake through the wood was lit by strings of Chinese
lanterns in the branches. The little bridge over the frozen brook was
outlined with miniature rose-coloured lights, in which the miracles
wrought by the hoar-frost on each transfigured reed and twig glowed
flame-colour to their inmost tracery against the darkness of the
overhanging trees.

Di walked with John in fairyland.

"Beauty and the beast," said some one, probably Mr. Lumley. But only the
"beast" heard, and he did not care.

There was a chorus of exclamations as they all emerged from the wood
