

E-text prepared by Louise Pryor, Jacqueline Jeremy, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



THE LOWEST RUNG

Together with The Hand on
the Latch, St. Luke's Summer
and The Understudy

by

MARY CHOLMONDELEY

Author of "Red Pottage"







London
John Murray, Albemarle Street, W.
1908

Copyright, 1908, in the
United States of America




    TO
    HOWARD STURGIS




CONTENTS

                              PAGE

    THE LOWEST RUNG             33

    THE HAND ON THE LATCH       82

    SAINT LUKE'S SUMMER        107

    THE UNDERSTUDY             156




PREFACE


I have been writing books for five-and-twenty years, novels of which I
believe myself to be the author, in spite of the fact that I have been
assured over and over again that they are not my own work. When I have
on several occasions ventured to claim them, I have seldom been
believed, which seems the more odd as, when others have claimed them,
they have been believed at once. Before I put my name to them they were
invariably considered to be, and reviewed as, the work of a man; and for
years after I had put my name to them various men have been mentioned to
me as the real author.

I remember once, when I was very young and shy, how at one of my first
London dinner-parties a charming elderly man discussed one of my
earliest books with such appreciation that I at last remarked that I had
written it myself. If I had looked for a surprised flash of delight at
the fact that so much talent was palpitating in white muslin beside him,
I was doomed to be disappointed. He gravely and gently said, "I know
that to be untrue," and the conversation was turned to other subjects.

One man did indeed actually announce himself to be the author of "Red
Pottage," in the presence of a large number of people, including the
late Mr. William Sharp, who related the occurrence to me. But the
incident ended uncomfortably for the claimant, which one would have
thought he might have foreseen.

But whether my books are mine or not, still whenever one of them appears
the same thing happens. I am pressed to own that such-and-such a
character "is taken from So-and-so." I have not yet yielded to these
exhortations to confession, partly, no doubt, because it would be very
awkward for me afterwards if I owned that thirty different persons were
the one and only original of "So-and-so."

My character for uprightness (if I ever had one) has never survived my
tacit, or in some cases emphatic, refusal to be squeezed through the
"clefts of confession."

It is perhaps impossible for those who do not write fiction to form any
conception how easily an erroneous idea gains credence that some one has
been "put in a book"; or, if the idea has once been entertained, how
impossible it is to eradicate it.

Looking back over a string of incidents of this kind in my own personal
experience, covering the last five-and-twenty years, I feel doubtful
whether I shall be believed if I instance some of them. They seem now,
after the lapse of years, frankly incredible, and yet they were real
enough to give me not a little pain at the time. It is the fashion
nowadays, if one says anything about oneself, to preface it by the
pontifical remark that what one writes is penned for the sake of others,
to save them, to cheer them, etc., etc. This, of course, now I come to
think of it, must be my reason also for my lapse into autobiography. I
see now that I only do it out of tenderness for the next generation.
Therefore, young writers of the future, now on the playing-fields of
Eton, take notice that my heart yearns over you. If, later on, you are
harrowed as I have been harrowed, remember

    _J'ai passé par là._

Observe the prints of my goloshes on the steep ascent, and take courage.
And if you are perturbed, as I have been perturbed, let me whisper to
you the exhortation of the bankrupt to the terrestrial globe:

    Never _you_ mind. Roll on.

When I first took a pen into my youthful hand, I lived in a very
secluded part of the Midlands, and perhaps, my little world being what
it was, it was inevitable that the originals of my characters,
especially the tiresome ones, should be immediately identified with the
kindly neighbours within a five-mile radius of my paternal Rectory. Five
miles was about the utmost our little pony could do. It was therefore
obviously impossible that I could be acquainted with any one beyond that
distance. And from first to last, from that day to this, no one leading
a secluded life has been so fatuous as to believe that my characters
were evolved out of my inner consciousness. "After all, you must own you
took them from _some one_," is a phrase which has long lost its novelty
for me. I remember even now my shocked astonishment when a furious
neighbour walked up to me and said, "We all recognised Mrs. Alwynn at
once as Mrs. ----, _and we all say it is not in the least like her_."

It was not, indeed. There was no shadow of resemblance. Did Mrs. ----,
who had been so kind to me from a child, ever hear that report, I
wonder? It gave me many a miserable hour, just when I was expanding in
the sunshine of my first favourable reviews.

When I was still quite a beginner, Mrs. Clifford published her beautiful
and touching book, "Aunt Anne."

There was, I am willing to believe--it is my duty to believe
_something_--a faint resemblance between her "Aunt Anne" and an old
great-aunt of mine, "Aunt Anna Maria," long since dead, whom I had only
seen once or twice when I was a small child.

The fact that I could not have known my departed relation did not
prevent two of my cousins, elderly maiden ladies who had had that
privilege, from writing to me in great indignation at my having ventured
to travesty my old aunt. They had found me out (I am always being found
out), and the vials of their wrath were poured out over me.

In my whilom ignorance, in my lamblike innocence of the darker side of
human nature, I actually thought that a disclaimer would settle the
matter.

When has a disclaimer ever been of any use? When has it ever achieved
anything except to add untruthfulness to my other crimes? Why have I
ever written one, after that first disastrous essay, in which I civilly
pointed out that not I, but Mrs. Clifford, the well-known writer, was
the author of "Aunt Anne?"

They replied at once to say that this was untrue, because I, and I
alone, _could_ have written it.

I showed my father the letter.

The two infuriated ladies were attached to my father, and had known him
for many years as a clergyman and a rural dean of unblemished character.
He wrote to them himself to assure them that they had made a mistake,
that I was not the author of the obnoxious work.

But the only effect his letter had on their minds was a pained uprootal
of their respect and long affection for him. And they both died some
years later, and (presumably) went up to heaven, convinced of my guilt,
in spite of the unscrupulous parental ruridiaconal effort to whitewash
me.

Long afterwards I mentioned this incident to Mrs. Clifford, but it did
not cause her surprise. She had had her own experiences. She told me
that when "Aunt Anne" appeared, she had many letters from persons with
whom she was unacquainted, reproaching her for having portrayed their
aunt.

The reverse of the medal ought perhaps to be mentioned. So primitive was
the circle in which my youth was passed that an adverse review, if seen
by one of the community, was at once put down to a disaffected and
totally uneducated person in our village.

A witty but unfavourable criticism in _Punch_ of my first story was
always believed by two ladies in the parish to have been penned by one
of the village tradesmen. It was in vain I assured them that the person
in question could not by any possibility be on the staff of _Punch_.
They only shook their heads, and repeated mysteriously that they "had
reasons for _knowing_ he had written it."

When we moved to London, I hoped I might fare better. But evidently I
had been born under an unlucky star. The "Aunt Anne" incident proved to
be only the first playful ripple which heralded the incoming of the

    Breakers of the boundless deep.

After the publication of "Red Pottage" a storm burst respecting one of
the characters--Mr. Gresley--which even now I have not forgotten. The
personal note was struck once more with vigour, but this time by the
clerical arm. I was denounced by name from a London pulpit. A Church
newspaper which shall be nameless suggested that my portrait of Mr.
Gresley was merely a piece of spite on my part, as I had probably been
jilted by a clergyman. I will not pretend that the turmoil gave me
unmixed pain. If it had, I should have been without literary vanity. But
when a witty bishop wrote to me that he had enjoined on his clergy the
study of Mr. Gresley as a Lenten penance, it was not possible for me to
remain permanently depressed.

The character was the outcome of long, close observation of large
numbers of clergymen, but not of one particular parson. Why, then, was
it so exactly like individual clergymen that I received excited or
enthusiastic letters from the parishioners of I dare not say how many
parishes, affirming that their vicar (whom I had never beheld), and he
alone, could have been the prototype of Mr. Gresley? I was frequently
implored to go down and "see for myself." Their most adorable platitudes
were chronicled and sent up to me, till I wrung my hands because it was
too late to insert them in "Red Pottage."[1] For they all fitted Mr.
Gresley like a glove, and I should certainly have used them if it had
been possible. For, as has been well said, "There is no copyright in
platitudes." They are part of our goodly heritage. And though people
like Mr. Gresley and my academic prig Wentworth have in one sense made a
particular field of platitude their own, by exercising themselves
continually upon it, nevertheless we cannot allow them to warn us off as
trespassers, or permit them to annex or enclose common land, the
property and birthright of the race.

Young men fresh from public schools also informed me that Mr. Gresley
was the facsimile of their tutor, and of no one else. I was at that time
unacquainted with any schoolmasters, being cut off from social
advantages. But that fact did me no good. The dispassionate statement of
it had no more effect on my young friends than my father's denial had on
my elderly relations.

I am ashamed to say that once again, as in the case of "Aunt Anne," I
endeavoured to exculpate myself in order to pacify two old maiden
ladies. Why is it always the acutely unmarried who are made miserable by
my books? Is it because--odious thought, avaunt!--married persons do not
open them? These two ladies did not, indeed, think that I had been
"paying out" some particular clergyman, as suggested in their favourite
paper, _The Guardian_,[2] but they were shocked by the profanity of the
book. Soon afterwards the Bishop of Stepney (now Bishop of London)
preached on "Red Pottage" in St. Paul's. I sent them a newspaper which
reprinted the sermon _verbatim_, with a note saying that I trusted this
expression of opinion on the part of their idolised preacher might
mitigate their condemnation of the book.

But when have my attempts at making an effect ever come off? My firework
never lights up properly like that of others! It only splutters and goes
out. I received in due course a dignified answer that they had both been
deeply distressed by my information, as it would prevent them ever going
to hear the Bishop of Stepney again.

My own experience, especially as to "Red Pottage" and "Prisoners,"
struck me as so direful, I seemed so peculiarly outside the protection
of Providence, like the celebrated plot of ground on which "no rain nor
no dew never fell," that I consulted several other brother and sister
novelists as to how they had fared in this delicate matter. It is not
for me to reveal the interesting skeletons concealed in cupboards not my
own, but I have almost invariably returned from these interviews
cheered, chuckling, and consoled by the comfortable realisation that
others had writhed on a hotter gridiron than I.

Georges Sand, when she was accused of lampooning a certain _abbé_, said
that to draw one character of that kind one must know a thousand. She
has, I think, put her finger on the truth which is not easy to find--at
least, I never found it until I read those words of hers.

It is necessary to know a very large number of persons of a certain
kind before one can evolve a type. Each he or she contributes a twig,
and the author weaves them into a nest. I have no doubt that I must have
taken such a twig from nearly every clergyman I met who had a _soupçon_
of Mr. Gresley in him.

But if an author takes one tiny trait, one saying, one sentiment, direct
from a person, there is always the danger that the contributor will
recognise the theft, and, if of a self-regarding temperament, will
instantly conclude that the _whole_ character is drawn from himself.
There is, for instance, no more universal trait, of what has been
unkindly called "the old-maid temperament" in either sex, than the
assertion that it is always busy. But when such a trait is noted in a
book, how many sensitive readers assume that it is a cruel personality.
If people could but perceive that what they think to be character in
themselves is often only sex, or sexlessness; if they could but believe
in the universality of what they hold to be their individuality! And yet
how easily they believe in it when it is pleasant to do so, when they
write books about themselves, and thousands of grateful readers bombard
the gifted authoress with letters to tell her that they also have "felt
just like that," and have "been helped" by her exquisite sentiments,
which are the exact replicas of their own!

The worst of it is that with the academic or clerical prig, when the
mind has long been permitted to run in a deep, platitudinous groove from
which it is at last powerless to escape, the resemblance to a prig in
fiction is sometimes more than fanciful. It is real. For there is no
doubt that prigs have a horrid family likeness to each other, whether in
books or in real life. I have sometimes felt as the puzzled mother of
some long-lost Tichborne might feel. Each claimant to the estates in
turn seems to acquire a look of the original because he _is_ a claimant.
Has not this one my lost Willy's eyes? But no! that one has Willy's
hands. True, but the last-comer snuffles exactly as my lost Willy
snuffled. How many men have begun suddenly and indubitably in my eyes to
resemble one of the adored prigs of my novels, merely because they
insisted on the likeness themselves.

The most obnoxious accident which has yet befallen me, the most wanton
blow below the belt which Fate has ever dealt me, is buried beneath the
snows of twenty years. But even now I cannot recall it without a
shudder. And if a carping critic ventures to point out that blows below
the belt are not often buried beneath snow, then all I can say is that
when I have made my meaning clear, I see no reason for a servile
conformity to academic rules of composition.

I was writing "Diana Tempest." One of the characters, a very worldly
religious young female prig, was much in my mind. I know many such. I
may as well mention here that I do not bless the hour on which I first
saw the light. I have not found life an ardent feast of tumultuous joy.
But I do realise that it has been embellished by the acquaintance of a
larger number of delightful prigs than falls to the lot of most. I have
much to be thankful for. Having got hold of the character of this lady,
I piloted her through courtship and marriage. I gleefully invented _all_
her sayings on these momentous occasions, and described the wedding and
the abhorrent bridegroom with great minuteness. In short, I gloated over
it.
