



Produced by Audrey Longhurst and the PG Online Distributed
Proofreading Team






    AUDREY

    BY
    MARY JOHNSTON

    AUTHOR OF "TO HAVE AND TO HOLD" AND
    "PRISONERS OF HOPE"


    WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
    F.C. YOHN

    BOSTON AND NEW YORK
    HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
    The Riverside Press, Cambridge
    1902

    COPYRIGHT, 1901, 1902, BY MARY JOHNSTON
    COPYRIGHT, 1902, BY HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.
    ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

    _Published February, 1902_





    _Books by Mary Johnston._


    AUDREY. With Illustrations in color. Crown 8vo, $1.50

    PRISONERS OF HOPE. With Frontispiece. Crown 8vo, $1.50.

    TO HAVE AND TO HOLD. With 8 Illustrations
      by HOWARD PYLE, E.B. THOMPSON,
      A.W. BETTS, and EMLEN McCONNELL.
      Crown 8vo, $1.50.


    HOUGHTON MIFFLIN & CO.
    BOSTON AND NEW YORK.

[Illustration: GAZED WITH WIDE-OPEN EYES AT THE INTRUDER (page 106)]

    TO
    ELOISE, ANNE, AND ELIZABETH




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER    TITLE           PAGE

    I.       THE CABIN IN THE VALLEY      1

    II.      THE COURT OF THE ORPHAN      16

    III.     DARDEN'S AUDREY      38

    IV.      THE ROAD TO WILLIAMSBURGH      52

    V.       THE STOREKEEPER      63

    VI.      MASTER AND MAN      73

    VII.     THE RETURN OF MONSIEUR JEAN HUGON      92

    VIII.    UNDER THE GREENWOOD TREE      106

    IX.      MACLEAN TO THE RESCUE      117

    X.       HAWARD AND EVELYN      131

    XI.      AUDREY OF THE GARDEN      145

    XII.     THE PORTRAIT OF A GENTLEMAN      163

    XIII.    A SABBATH DAY'S JOURNEY      179

    XIV.     THE BEND IN THE ROAD      194

    XV.      HUGON SPEAKS HIS MIND      206

    XVI.     AUDREY AND EVELYN      222

    XVII.    WITHIN THE PLAYHOUSE      237

    XVIII.   A QUESTION OF COLORS      249

    XIX.     THE GOVERNOR'S BALL      262

    XX.      THE UNINVITED GUEST      273

    XXI.     AUDREY AWAKES      287

    XXII.    BY THE RIVERSIDE      300

    XXIII.   A DUEL      312

    XXIV.    AUDREY COMES TO WESTOVER      322

    XXV.     TWO WOMEN      337

    XXVI.    SANCTUARY      349

    XXVII.   THE MISSION OF TRUELOVE      363

    XXVIII.  THE PLAYER      375

    XXIX.    AMOR VINCIT      391

    XXX.     THE LAST ACT      402




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                        PAGE

  GAZED WITH WIDE-OPEN EYES AT THE INTRUDER (page 106)      _Frontispiece_

  "HAD YOU LOVED ME--I HAD BEEN HAPPY"      58

  AUDREY LEFT HER WARNING TO BE SPOKEN BY MACLEAN      206

  "I DO NOT THINK I HAVE THE HONOR OF KNOWING"--      270

  HER DARK EYES MADE APPEAL      342

  "JEAN! JEAN HUGON!"      414



AUDREY




CHAPTER I

THE CABIN IN THE VALLEY


The valley lay like a ribbon thrown into the midst of the encompassing
hills. The grass which grew there was soft and fine and abundant; the
trees which sprang from its dark, rich mould were tall and great of girth.
A bright stream flashed through it, and the sunshine fell warm upon the
grass and changed the tassels of the maize into golden plumes. Above the
valley, east and north and south, rose the hills, clad in living green,
mantled with the purpling grape, wreathed morn and eve with trailing mist.
To the westward were the mountains, and they dwelt apart in a blue haze.
Only in the morning, if the mist were not there, the sunrise struck upon
their long summits, and in the evening they stood out, high and black and
fearful, against the splendid sky. The child who played beside the cabin
door often watched them as the valley filled with shadows, and thought of
them as a great wall between her and some land of the fairies which must
needs lie beyond that barrier, beneath the splendor and the evening star.
The Indians called them the Endless Mountains, and the child never doubted
that they ran across the world and touched the floor of heaven.

In the hands of the woman who was spinning the thread broke and the song
died in the white throat of the girl who stood in the doorway. For a
moment the two gazed with widening eyes into the green September world
without the cabin; then the woman sprang to her feet, tore from the wall a
horn, and, running to the door, wound it lustily. The echoes from the
hills had not died when a man and a boy, the one bearing a musket, the
other an axe, burst from the shadow of the forest, and at a run crossed
the greensward and the field of maize between them and the women. The
child let fall her pine cones and pebbles, and fled to her mother, to
cling to her skirts, and look with brown, frightened eyes for the wonder
that should follow the winding of the horn. Only twice could she remember
that clear summons for her father: once when it was winter and snow was on
the ground, and a great wolf, gaunt and bold, had fallen upon their sheep;
and once when a drunken trader from Germanna, with a Pamunkey who had
tasted of the trader's rum, had not waited for an invitation before
entering the cabin. It was not winter now, and there was no sign of the
red-faced trader or of the dreadful, capering Indian. There was only a
sound in the air, a strange noise coming to them from the pass between the
hills over which rose the sun.

The man with the musket sent his voice before him as he approached the
group upon the doorstep: "Alce, woman! What's amiss? I see naught wrong!"

His wife stepped forward to meet him. "There's naught to see, William.
It's to hear. There was a noise. Molly and I heard it, and then we lost
it. There it is again!"

Fronting the cabin, beyond the maize field and the rich green grass and
the placid stream, rose two hills, steep and thickly wooded, and between
them ran a narrow, winding, and rocky pass. Down this gorge, to the
listening pioneer, now came a confused and trampling sound.

"It is iron striking against the rocks!" he announced. "The hoofs of
horses"--

"Iron!" cried his wife. "The horses in Virginia go unshod! And what should
a troop of horse do here, beyond the frontier, where even the rangers
never come?"

The man shook his head, a frown of perplexity upon his bronzed and bearded
face. "It is the sound of the hoofs of horses," he said, "and they are
coming through the pass. Hark!"

A trumpet blew, and there came a noise of laughter. The child pressed
close to her brother's side. "Oh, Robin, maybe 't is the fairies!"

Out from the gloom of the pass into the sunshine of the valley, splashing
through the stream, trampling the long grass, laughing, and calling one
rider to the other, burst a company of fifty horsemen. The trumpet blew
again, and the entire party, drawing rein, stared at the unexpected maize
field, the cabin, and the people about the door.

Between the intruders and the lonely folk, whose nearest neighbors were
twenty miles away, was only a strip of sunny grass, dotted over with the
stumps of trees that had been felled lest they afford cover for attacking
savages. A man, riding at the head of the invading party, beckoned,
somewhat imperiously, to the pioneer; and the latter, still with his
musket in the hollow of his arm, strode across the greensward, and
finding himself in the midst, not of rude traders and rangers, but of
easy, smiling, periwigged gentlemen, handsomely dressed and accoutred,
dropped the butt of his gun upon the ground, and took off his
squirrel-skin cap.

"You are deep in the wilderness, good fellow," said the man who had
beckoned, and who was possessed of a stately figure, a martial
countenance, and an air of great authority. "How far is it to the
mountains?"

The pioneer stared at the long blue range, cloudlike in the distance. "I
don't know," he answered. "I hunt to the eastward. Twenty miles, maybe.
You're never going to climb them?"

"We are come out expressly to do so," answered the other heartily, "having
a mind to drink the King's health with our heads in the clouds! We need
another axeman to clear away the fallen trees and break the nets of
grapevine. Wilt go along amongst our rangers yonder, and earn a pistole
and undying fame?"

The woodsman looked from the knot of gentlemen to the troop of hardy
rangers, who, with a dozen ebony servants and four Meherrin Indians, made
up the company. Under charge of the slaves were a number of packhorses.
Thrown across one was a noble deer; a second bore a brace of wild turkeys
and a two-year-old bear, fat and tender; a third had a legion of pots and
pans for the cooking of the woodland cheer; while the burden of several
others promised heart's content of good liquor. From the entire troop
breathed a most enticing air of gay daring and good-fellowship. The
gentlemen were young and of cheerful countenances; the rangers in the rear
sat their horses and whistled to the woodpeckers in the sugar-trees; the
negroes grinned broadly; even the Indians appeared a shade less saturnine
than usual. The golden sunshine poured upon them all, and the blue
mountains that no Englishman had ever passed seemed for the moment as soft
and yielding as the cloud that slept along their summits. And no man knew
what might be just beyond the mountains: Frenchmen, certainly, and the
great lakes and the South Sea: but, besides these, might there not be
gold, glittering stones, new birds and beasts and plants, strange secrets
of the hills? It was only westward-ho! for a week or two, with good
company and good drink--

The woodsman shifted from one foot to the other, but his wife, who had now
crossed the grass to his side, had no doubts.

"You'll not go, William!" she cried. "Remember the smoke that you saw
yesterday from the hilltop! If the Northern Indians are on the warpath
against the Southern, and are passing between us and the mountains, there
may be straying bands. I'll not let you go!"

In her eagerness she clasped his arm with her hands. She was a comely,
buxom dame, and the circle on horseback, being for the most part young and
gallant, and not having seen a woman for some days, looked kindly upon
her.

"And so you saw a smoke, goodwife, and are afraid of roving Indians?" said
the gentleman who had spoken before. "That being the case, your husband
has our permission to stay behind. On my life, 't is a shame to ride away
and leave you in danger of such marauders!"

"Will your Excellency permit me to volunteer for guard duty?" demanded a
young man who had pressed his horse to the leader's side. "It's odds,
though, that when you return this way you'll find me turned Papist. I'll
swear your Excellency never saw in Flanders carved or painted saint so
worthy of your prayers as yonder breathing one!"

The girl Molly had followed her parents, and now stood upon a little
grassy knoll, surveying with wide brown eyes the gay troop before her. A
light wind was blowing, and it wrapped her dress of tender, faded blue
around her young limbs, and lifted her loosened hair, gilded by the
sunshine into the likeness of an aureole. Her face was serious and
wondering, but fair as a woodland flower. She had placed her hand upon the
head of the child who was with her, clinging to her dress. The green knoll
formed a pedestal; behind was the sky, as blue as that of Italy; the two
figures might have been some painted altar-piece.

The sprightly company, which had taken for its motto "Sic juvat
transcendere montes," looked and worshiped. There was a moment of silent
devotion, broken by one of the gentlemen demanding if 't were not time for
dinner; another remarked that they might go much farther and fare much
worse, in respect of a cool, sweet spot in which to rest during the heat
of the afternoon; and a third boldly proposed that they go no farther at
all that day. Their leader settled the question by announcing that, Mr.
Mason's suggestion finding favor in his sight, they would forthwith
dismount, dine, drink red wine and white, and wear out the heat of the day
in this sylvan paradise until four of the clock, when the trumpet should
sound for the mount; also, that if the goodwife and her daughter would do
them the honor to partake of their rustic fare, their healths should be
drunk in nothing less than Burgundy.

As he spoke he swung himself from the saddle, pulled out his ruffles, and
raised his hat. "Ladies, permit me,"--a wave of his hand toward his
escort, who were now also on foot. "Colonel Robertson, Captain Clonder,
Captain Brooke, Mr. Haward, Mr. Beverley, Dr. Robinson, Mr. Fontaine, Mr.
Todd, Mr. Mason,--all of the Tramontane Order. For myself, I am Alexander
Spotswood, at your service."

The pioneer, standing behind his wife, plucked her by the sleeve. "Ecod,
Alce, 't is the Governor himself! Mind your manners!"

Alce, who had been a red-cheeked dairymaid in a great house in England,
needed no admonition. Her curtsy was profound; and when the Governor took
her by the hand and kissed her still blooming cheek, she curtsied again.
Molly, who had no memories of fine gentlemen and the complaisance which
was their due, blushed fire-red at the touch of his Excellency's lips,
forgot to curtsy, and knew not where to look. When, in her confusion, she
turned her head aside, her eyes met those of the young man who had
threatened to turn Papist. He bowed, with his hand upon his heart, and she
blushed more deeply than before.
