


PIONEERS OF THE OLD SOUTH

A CHRONICLE OF ENGLISH COLONIAL BEGINNINGS

By Mary Johnston




CONTENTS

     I.    THE THREE SHIPS SAIL
     II.   THE ADVENTURERS
     III.  JAMESTOWN
     IV.   JOHN SMITH
     V.    THE SEA ADVENTURE
     VI.   SIR THOMAS DALE
     VII.  YOUNG VIRGINIA
     VIII. ROYAL GOVERNMENT
     IX.   MARYLAND
     X.    CHURCH AND KINGDOM
     XI.   COMMONWEALTH AND RESTORATION
     XII.  NATHANIEL BACON
     XIII. REBELLION AND CHANGE
     XIV.  THE CAROLINAS
     XV.   ALEXANDER SPOTSWOOD
     XVI.  GEORGIA


     THE NAVIGATION LAWS

     BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE




PIONEERS OF THE OLD SOUTH



CHAPTER I. THE THREE SHIPS SAIL

Elizabeth of England died in 1603. There came to the English throne
James Stuart, King of Scotland, King now of England and Scotland. In
1604 a treaty of peace ended the long war with Spain. Gone was the
sixteenth century; here, though in childhood, was the seventeenth
century.

Now that the wars were over, old colonization schemes were revived
in the English mind. Of the motives, which in the first instance had
prompted these schemes, some with the passing of time had become weaker,
some remained quite as strong as before. Most Englishmen and women knew
now that Spain had clay feet; and that Rome, though she might threaten,
could not always perform what she threatened. To abase the pride of
Spain, to make harbors of refuge for the angel of the Reformation--these
wishes, though they had not vanished, though no man could know how long
the peace with Spain would last, were less fervid than they had been in
the days of Drake. But the old desire for trade remained as strong as
ever. It would be a great boon to have English markets in the New World,
as well as in the Old, to which merchants might send their wares, and
from which might be drawn in bulk, the raw stuffs that were needed
at home. The idea of a surplus population persisted; England of five
million souls still thought that she was crowded and that it would
be well to have a land of younger sons, a land of promise for all not
abundantly provided for at home. It were surely well, for mere pride's
sake, to have due lot and part in the great New World! And wealth like
that which Spain had found was a dazzle and a lure. "Why, man, all their
dripping-pans are pure gold, and all the chains with which they chain up
their streets are massy gold; all the prisoners they take are fettered
in gold; and for rubies and diamonds they go forth on holidays and
gather 'em by the seashore!" So the comedy of "Eastward Ho!" seen on the
London stage in 1605--"Eastward Ho!" because yet they thought of America
as on the road around to China.

In this year Captain George Weymouth sailed across the sea and spent
a summer month in North Virginia--later, New England. Weymouth had
powerful backers, and with him sailed old adventurers who had been
with Raleigh. Coming home to England with five Indians in his company,
Weymouth and his voyage gave to public interest the needed fillip
towards action. Here was the peace with Spain, and here was the new
interest in Virginia. "Go to!" said Mother England. "It is time to place
our children in the world!"

The old adventurers of the day of Sir Humphrey Gilbert had acted as
individuals. Soon was to come in the idea of cooperative action--the
idea of the joint-stock company, acting under the open permission of the
Crown, attended by the interest and favor of numbers of the people, and
giving to private initiative and personal ambition, a public tone.
Some men of foresight would have had Crown and Country themselves the
adventurers, superseding any smaller bodies. But for the moment the
fortunes of Virginia were furthered by a group within the great group,
by a joint-stock company, a corporation.

In 1600 had come into being the East India Company, prototype of many
companies to follow. Now, six years later, there arose under one royal
charter two companies, generally known as the London and the Plymouth.
The first colony planted by the latter was short-lived. Its letters
patent were for North Virginia. Two ships, the Mary and John and the
Gift of God, sailed with over a hundred settlers. These men, reaching
the coast of what is now Maine, built a fort and a church on the banks
of the Kennebec. Then followed the usual miseries typical of colonial
venture--sickness, starvation, and a freezing winter. With the return of
summer the enterprise was abandoned. The foundation of New England was
delayed awhile, her Pilgrims yet in England, though meditating that
first remove to Holland, her Mayflower only a ship of London port,
staunch, but with no fame above another.

The London Company, soon to become the Virginia Company, therefore
engages our attention. The charter recites that Sir Thomas Gates and
Sir George Somers, Knights, Richard Hakluyt, clerk, Prebendary of
Westminster, Edward-Maria Wingfield, and other knights, gentlemen,
merchants, and adventurers, wish "to make habitation, plantation, and
to deduce a colony of sundry of our people into that part of America
commonly called Virginia." It covenants with them and gives them for
a heritage all America between the thirty-fourth and the forty-first
parallels of latitude.

The thirty-fourth parallel passes through the middle of what is now
South Carolina; the forty-first grazes New York, crosses the northern
tip of New Jersey, divides Pennsylvania, and so westward across to that
Pacific or South Sea that the age thought so near to the Atlantic. All
England might have been placed many times over in what was given to
those knights, gentlemen, merchants, and others.

The King's charter created a great Council of Virginia, sitting in
London, governing from overhead. In the new land itself there should
exist a second and lesser council. The two councils had authority within
the range of Virginian matters, but the Crown retained the power of
veto. The Council in Virginia might coin money for trade with the
Indians, expel invaders, import settlers, punish ill-doers, levy and
collect taxes--should have, in short, dignity and power enough for any
colony. Likewise, acting for the whole, it might give and take orders
"to dig, mine and search for all manner of mines of gold, silver and
copper... to have and enjoy... yielding to us, our heirs and successors,
the fifth part only of all the same gold and silver, and the fifteenth
part of all the same copper."

Now are we ready--it being Christmas-tide of the year 1606--to go to
Virginia. Riding on the Thames, before Blackwall, are three ships, small
enough in all conscience' sake, the Susan Constant, the Goodspeed, and
the Discovery. The Admiral of this fleet is Christopher Newport, an old
seaman of Raleigh's. Bartholomew Gosnold captains the Goodspeed, and
John Ratcliffe the Discovery. The three ships have aboard their crews
and one hundred and twenty colonists, all men. The Council in Virginia
is on board, but it does not yet know itself as such, for the names of
its members have been deposited by the superior home council in a sealed
box, to be opened only on Virginia soil.

The colonists have their paper of instructions. They shall find out a
safe port in the entrance of a navigable river. They shall be prepared
against surprise and attack. They shall observe "whether the river on
which you plant doth spring out of mountains or out of lakes. If it be
out of any lake the passage to the other sea will be the more easy, and
like enough... you shall find some spring which runs the contrary
way toward the East India sea." They must avoid giving offense to the
"naturals"--must choose a healthful place for their houses--must
guard their shipping. They are to set down in black and white for the
information of the Council at home all such matters as directions and
distances, the nature of soils and forests and the various commodities
that they may find. And no man is to return from Virginia without leave
from the Council, and none is to write home any discouraging letter. The
instructions end, "Lastly and chiefly, the way to prosper and to achieve
good success is to make yourselves all of one mind for the good of
your country and your own, and to serve and fear God, the Giver of
all Goodness, for every plantation which our Heavenly Father hath not
planted shall be rooted out."

Nor did they lack verses to go by, as their enterprise itself did not
lack poetry. Michael Drayton wrote for them:--

     Britons, you stay too long,
     Quickly aboard bestow you,
        And with a merry gale,
        Swell your stretched sail,
     With vows as strong
     As the winds that blow you.

     Your course securely steer,
     West and by South forth keep;
        Rocks, lee shores nor shoals,
        Where Eolus scowls,
     You need not fear,

     So absolute the deep.
     And cheerfully at sea
        Success you still entice,
        To get the pearl and gold,
     And ours to hold
     VIRGINIA,
     Earth's only paradise!...

     And in regions far
     Such heroes bring ye forth
        As those from whom we came;
        And plant our name
     Under that star
     Not known unto our north.

See the parting upon Thames's side, Englishmen going, English kindred,
friends, and neighbors calling farewell, waving hat and scarf, standing
bare-headed in the gray winter weather! To Virginia--they are going to
Virginia! The sails are made upon the Susan Constant, the Goodspeed, and
the Discovery. The last wherry carries aboard the last adventurer. The
anchors are weighed. Down the river the wind bears the ships toward the
sea. Weather turning against them, they taste long delay in the Downs,
but at last are forth upon the Atlantic. Hourly the distance grows
between London town and the outgoing folk, between English shores and
where the surf breaks on the pale Virginian beaches. Far away--far away
and long ago--yet the unseen, actual cables hold, and yesterday and
today stand embraced, the lips of the Thames meet the lips of the James,
and the breath of England mingles with the breath of America.



CHAPTER II. THE ADVENTURERS

What was this Virginia to which they were bound? In the sixteenth
and early seventeenth centuries the name stood for a huge stretch of
littoral, running southward from lands of long winters and fur-bearing
animals to lands of the canebrake, the fig, the magnolia, the chameleon,
and the mockingbird. The world had been circumnavigated; Drake had
passed up the western coast--and yet cartographers, the learned, and
those who took the word from the learned, strangely visualized the North
American mainland as narrow indeed. Apparently, they conceived it as a
kind of extended Central America. The huge rivers puzzled them. There
existed a notion that these might be estuaries, curling and curving
through the land from sea to sea. India--Cathay--spices and wonders and
Orient wealth--lay beyond the South Sea, and the South Sea was but a few
days' march from Hatteras or Chesapeake. The Virginia familiar to the
mind of the time lay extended, and she was very slender. Her right hand
touched the eastern ocean, and her left hand touched the western.

Contact and experience soon modified this general notion. Wider
knowledge, political and economic considerations, practical reasons of
all kinds, drew a different physical form for old Virginia. Before the
seventeenth century had passed away, they had given to her northern
end a baptism of other names. To the south she was lopped to make the
Carolinas. Only to the west, for a long time, she seemed to grow, while
like a mirage the South Sea and Cathay receded into the distance.

This narrative, moving with the three ships from England, and through a
time span of less than a hundred and fifty years, deals with a region
of the western hemisphere a thousand miles in length, several hundred
in breadth, stretching from the Florida line to the northern edge of
Chesapeake Bay, and from the Atlantic to the Appalachians. Out of this
Virginia there grow in succession the ancient colonies and the modern
States of Virginia, Maryland, South and North Carolina, and Georgia.

But for many a year Virginia itself was the only settlement and the only
name. This Virginia was a country favored by nature. Neither too hot nor
too cold, it was rich-soiled and capable of every temperate growth in
its sunniest aspect. Great rivers drained it, flowing into a great
bay, almost a sea, many-armed as Briareus, affording safe and sheltered
harbors. Slowly, with beauty, the land mounted to the west. The sun set
behind wooded mountains, long wave-lines raised far back in geologic
time. The valleys were many and beautiful, watered by sliding streams.
Back to the east again, below the rolling land, were found the
shimmering levels, the jewel-green marshes, the wide, slow waters, and
at last upon the Atlantic shore the thunder of the rainbow-tinted surf.
Various and pleasing was the country. Springs and autumns were long and
balmy, the sun shone bright, there was much blue sky, a rich flora and
fauna. There were mineral wealth and water power, and breadth and depth
for agriculture. Such was the Virginia between the Potomac and the Dan,
the Chesapeake and the Alleghanies.

This, and not the gold-bedight slim neighbor of Cathay, was now the
lure of the Susan Constant, the Goodspeed, and the Discovery. But those
aboard, obsessed by Spanish America, imperfectly knowing the features
and distances of the orb, yet clung to their first vision. But they knew
there would be forest and Indians. Tales enough had been told of both!

What has to be imaged is a forest the size of Virginia. Here and there,
chiefly upon river banks, show small Indian clearings. Here and there
are natural meadows, and toward the salt water great marshes, the home
of waterfowl. But all these are little or naught in the whole, faint
adornments sewed upon a shaggy garment, green in summer, flame-hued in
autumn, brown in winter, green and flower-colored in the spring. Nor
was the forest to any appreciable extent like much Virginian forest of
today, second growth, invaded, hewed down, and renewed, to hear again
the sound of the axe, set afire by a thousand accidents, burning upon
its own funeral pyres, all its primeval glory withered. The forest of
old Virginia was jocund and powerful, eternally young and eternally old.
The forest was Despot in the land--was Emperor and Pope.

With the forest went the Indian. They had a pact together. The Indians
hacked out space for their villages of twenty or thirty huts, their
maize and bean fields and tobacco patches. They took saplings for poles
and bark to cover the huts and wood for fires. The forest gave canoe and
bow and arrow, household bowls and platters, the sides of the drum that
was beaten at feasts. It furnished trees serviceable for shelter when
the foe was stalked. It was their wall and roof, their habitat. It was
one of the Four Friends of the Indians--the Ground, the Waters, the Sky,
the Forest. The forest was everywhere, and the Indians dwelled in the
forest. Not unnaturally, they held that this world was theirs.

Upon the three ships, sailing, sailing, moved a few men who could speak
with authority of the forest and of Indians. Christopher Newport was
upon his first voyage to Virginia, but he knew the Indies and the South
American coast. He had sailed and had fought under Francis Drake. And
Bartholomew Gosnold had explored both for himself and for Raleigh. These
two could tell others what to look for. In their company there was also
John Smith. This gentleman, it is true, had not wandered, fought, and
companioned with romance in America, but he had done so everywhere else.
He had as yet no experience with Indians, but he could conceive that
rough experiences were rough experiences, whether in Europe, Asia,
Africa, or America. And as he knew there was a family likeness among
dangerous happenings, so also he found one among remedies, and he had a
bag full of stories of strange happenings and how they should be met.

They were going the old, long West Indies sea road. There was time
enough for talking, wondering, considering the past, fantastically
building up the future. Meeting in the ships' cabins over ale tankards,
pacing up and down the small high-raised poop-decks, leaning idle over
the side, watching the swirling dark-blue waters or the stars of night,
lying idle upon the deck, propped by the mast while the trade-winds
blew and up beyond sail and rigging curved the sky--they had time enough
indeed to plan for marvels! If they could have seen ahead, what pictures
of things to come they might have beheld rising, falling, melting one
into another!

Certain of the men upon the Susan Constant, the Goodspeed, and the
Discovery stand out clearly, etched against the sky.

Christopher Newport might be forty years old. He had been of Raleigh's
captains and was chosen, a very young man, to bring to England from the
