



Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.








'Hell fer Sartain'

and

Other Stories


by

JOHN FOX, JR.




  TO
  MY BROTHER
  JAMES


AUTHOR'S NOTE




CONTENTS


  ON HELL-FER-SARTAIN CREEK
  THROUGH THE GAP
  A TRICK O' TRADE
  GRAYSON'S BABY
  COURTIN' ON CUTSHIN
  THE MESSAGE IN THE SAND
  THE SENATOR'S LAST TRADE
  PREACHIN' ON KINGDOM-COME
  THE PASSING OF ABRAHAM SHIVERS
  A PURPLE RHODODENDRON




ON HELL-FER-SARTAIN CREEK


Thar was a dancin'-party Christmas night on "Hell fer Sartain."  Jes
tu'n up the fust crick beyond the bend thar, an' climb onto a stump,
an' holler about ONCE, an' you'll see how the name come.  Stranger,
hit's HELL fer sartain!  Well, Rich Harp was thar from the head-waters,
an' Harve Hall toted Nance Osborn clean across the Cumberlan'.  Fust
one ud swing Nance, an' then t'other.  Then they'd take a pull out'n
the same bottle o' moonshine, an'--fust one an' then t'other--they'd
swing her agin.  An' Abe Shivers a-settin' thar by the fire a-bitin'
his thumbs!

Well, things was sorter whoopin', when somebody ups an' tells Harve
that Rich had said somep'n' agin Nance an' him, an' somebody ups an'
tells Rich that Harve had said somep'n' agin Nance an' HIM.  In a
minute, stranger, hit was like two wild-cats in thar.  Folks got 'em
parted, though, but thar was no more a-swingin' of Nance that night.
Harve toted her back over the Cumberlan', an' Rich's kinsfolks tuk him
up "Hell fer Sartain"; but Rich got loose, an' lit out lickety-split
fer Nance Osborn's.  He knowed Harve lived too fer over Black Mountain
to go home that night, an' he rid right across the river an' up to
Nance's house, an' hollered fer Harve.  Harve poked his head out'n the
loft--he knowed whut was wanted--an' Harve says, "Uh, come in hyeh an'
go to bed.  Hit's too late!" An' Rich seed him a-gapin' like a chicken,
an' in he walked, stumblin' might' nigh agin the bed whar Nance was
a-layin', listenin' an' not sayin' a word.

Stranger, them two fellers slept together plum frien'ly, an' they et
together plum frien'ly next mornin', an' they sa'ntered down to the
grocery plum frien'ly.  An' Rich says, "Harve," says he, "let's have a
drink."  "All right, Rich," says Harve.  An' Rich says, "Harve," says
he, "you go out'n that door an' I'll go out'n this door."  "All right,
Rich," says Harve, an' out they walked, steady, an' thar was two shoots
shot, an' Rich an' Harve both drapped, an' in ten minutes they was
stretched out on Nance's bed an' Nance was a-lopin' away fer the yarb
doctor.

The gal nussed 'em both plum faithful.  Rich didn't hev much to say,
an' Harve didn't hev much to say.  Nance was sorter quiet, an' Nance's
mammy, ole Nance, jes grinned.  Folks come in to ax atter 'em right
peart.  Abe Shivers come cl'ar 'cross the river--powerful frien'ly--an'
ever' time Nance ud walk out to the fence with him.  One time she
didn't come back, an' ole Nance fotched the boys thar dinner, an' ole
Nance fotched thar supper, an' then Rich he axed whut was the matter
with young Nance.  An' ole Nance jes snorted.  Atter a while Rich says:
"Harve," says he, "who tol' you that I said that word agin you an'
Nance?" "Abe Shivers," says Harve.  "An' who tol' you," says Harve,
"that I said that word agin Nance an' YOU?"  "Abe Shivers," says Rich.
An' both says, "Well, damn me!"  An' Rich tu'ned right over an' begun
pullin' straws out'n the bed.  He got two out, an' he bit one off, an'
he says:  "Harve," says he, "I reckon we better draw fer him.  The
shortes' gits him."  An' they drawed.  Well, nobody ever knowed which
got the shortes' straw, stranger, but--

Thar'll be a dancin'-party comin' Christmas night on "Hell fer
Sartain." Rich Harp 'll be thar from the head-waters.  Harve Hall's
a-goin' to tote the Widder Shivers clean across the Cumberlan'.  Fust
one 'll swing Nance, an' then t'other.  Then they'll take a pull out'n
the same bottle o' moonshine, an'--fust one an' then t'other--they'll
swing her agin, jes the same.  ABE won't be thar.  He's a-settin' by a
bigger fire, I reckon (ef he ain't in it), a-bitin' his thumbs!




THROUGH THE GAP


When thistles go adrift, the sun sets down the valley between the
hills; when snow comes, it goes down behind the Cumberland and streams
through a great fissure that people call the Gap.  Then the last light
drenches the parson's cottage under Imboden Hill, and leaves an
after-glow of glory on a majestic heap that lies against the east.
Sometimes it spans the Gap with a rainbow.

Strange people and strange tales come through this Gap from the
Kentucky hills.  Through it came these two, late one day--a man and a
woman--afoot.  I met them at the foot-bridge over Roaring Fork.

"Is thar a preacher anywhar aroun' hyeh?" he asked.  I pointed to the
cottage under Imboden Hill.  The girl flushed slightly and turned her
head away with a rather unhappy smile.  Without a word, the mountaineer
led the way towards town.  A moment more and a half-breed Malungian
passed me on the bridge and followed them.

At dusk the next day I saw the mountaineer chopping wood at a shanty
under a clump of rhododendron on the river-bank.  The girl was cooking
supper inside.  The day following he was at work on the railroad, and
on Sunday, after church, I saw the parson.  The two had not been to
him.  Only that afternoon the mountaineer was on the bridge with
another woman, hideously rouged and with scarlet ribbons fluttering
from her bonnet.  Passing on by the shanty, I saw the Malungian talking
to the girl.  She apparently paid no heed to him until, just as he was
moving away, he said something mockingly, and with a nod of his head
back towards the bridge.  She did not look up even then, but her face
got hard and white, and, looking back from the road, I saw her slipping
through the bushes into the dry bed of the creek, to make sure that
what the half-breed told her was true.

The two men were working side by side on the railroad when I saw them
again, but on the first pay-day the doctor was called to attend the
Malungian, whose head was split open with a shovel.  I was one of two
who went out to arrest his assailant, and I had no need to ask who he
was.  The mountaineer was a devil, the foreman said, and I had to club
him with a pistol-butt before he would give in.  He said he would get
even with me; but they all say that, and I paid no attention to the
threat.  For a week he was kept in the calaboose, and when I passed the
shanty just after he was sent to the county-seat for trial, I found it
empty.  The Malungian, too, was gone.  Within a fortnight the
mountaineer was in the door of the shanty again.  Having no accuser, he
had been discharged.  He went back to his work, and if he opened his
lips I never knew.  Every day I saw him at work, and he never failed to
give me a surly look.  Every dusk I saw him in his door-way, waiting,
and I could guess for what.  It was easy to believe that the stern
purpose in his face would make its way through space and draw her to
him again.  And she did come back one day.  I had just limped down the
mountain with a sprained ankle.  A crowd of women was gathered at the
edge of the woods, looking with all their eyes to the shanty on the
river-bank.  The girl stood in the door-way.  The mountaineer was
coming back from work with his face down.

"He hain't seed her yit," said one.  "He's goin' to kill her shore.  I
tol' her he would.  She said she reckoned he would, but she didn't
keer."

For a moment I was paralyzed by the tragedy at hand.  She was in the
door looking at him when he raised his head.  For one moment he stood
still, staring, and then he started towards her with a quickened step.
I started too, then, every step a torture, and as I limped ahead she
made a gesture of terror and backed into the room before him.  The door
closed, and I listened for a pistol-shot and a scream.  It must have
been done with a knife, I thought, and quietly, for when I was within
ten paces of the cabin he opened the door again.  His face was very
white; he held one hand behind him, and he was nervously fumbling at
his chill with the other.  As he stepped towards me I caught the handle
of a pistol in my side pocket and waited.  He looked at me sharply.

"Did you say the preacher lived up thar?" he asked.

"Yes," I said, breathlessly.

In the door-way just then stood the girl with a bonnet in her hand, and
at a nod from him they started up the hill towards the cottage.  They
came down again after a while, he stalking ahead, and she, after the
mountain fashion, behind.  And after this fashion I saw them at sunset
next day pass over the bridge and into the mouth of the Gap whence they
came.  Through this Gap come strange people and strange tales from the
Kentucky hills.  Over it, sometimes, is the span of a rainbow.




A TRICK O' TRADE


Stranger, I'm a separATE man, an' I don't inQUIZite into no man's
business; but you ax me straight, an' I tell ye straight:  You watch
ole Tom!

Now, I'll take ole Tom Perkins' word agin anybody's 'ceptin' when hit
comes to a hoss trade ur a piece o' land.  Fer in the tricks o' sech,
ole Tom 'lows--well, hit's diff'ent; an' I reckon, stranger, as how hit
sorter is.  He was a-stayin' at Tom's house, the furriner was,
a-dickerin' fer a piece o' lan'--the same piece, mebbe, that you're
atter now--an' Tom keeps him thar fer a week to beat him out'n a
dollar, an' then won't let him pay nary a cent fer his boa'd.  Now,
stranger, that's Tom.

Well, Abe Shivers was a-workin' fer Tom--you've heerd tell o' Abe--an'
the furriner wasn't more'n half gone afore Tom seed that Abe was up to
some of his devilMINT.  Abe kin hatch up more devilMINT in a minit than
Satan hisself kin in a week; so Tom jes got Abe out'n the stable under
a hoe-handle, an' tol' him to tell the whole thing straight ur he'd
have to go to glory right thar.  An' Abe tol'!

'Pears like Abe had foun' a streak o' iron ore on the lan', an' had
racked his jinny right down to Hazlan an' tol' the furriner, who was
thar a-buyin' wild lands right an' left.  Co'se, Abe was goin' to make
the furriner whack up fer gittin' the lan' so cheap.  Well, brother,
the furriner come up to Tom's an' got Tom into one o' them new-fangled
trades whut the furriners calls a option--t'other feller kin git out'n
hit, but you can't.  The furriner 'lowed he'd send his podner up thar
next day to put the thing in writin' an' close up the trade.  Hit
looked like ole Tom was ketched fer shore, an' ef Tom didn't ra'r, I'd
tell a man.  He jes let that hoe-handle drap on Abe fer 'bout haffen
hour, jes to give him time to study, an' next day thar was ole Tom
a-settin' on his orchard fence a-lookin' mighty unknowin', when the
furriner's podner come a-prancin' up an' axed ef old Tom Perkins lived
thar.

Ole Tom jes whispers.

Now, I clean fergot to tell ye, stranger, that Abe Shivers nuver could
talk out loud.  He tol' so many lies that the Lawd--jes to make things
even--sorter fixed Abe, I reckon, so he couldn't lie on more'n one side
o' the river at a time.  Ole Tom jes knowed t'other furriner had tol'
this un 'bout Abe, an,' shore 'nough, the feller says, sorter soft,
says he:

"Aw, you air the feller whut foun' the ore?"

Ole Tom--makin' like he was Abe, mind ye--jes whispers:  "Thar hain't
none thar."

Stranger, the feller mos' fell off'n his hoss.  "Whut?" says he.  Ole
Tom kep' a-whisperin':  "Thar hain't no coal--no nothing; ole Tom
Perkins made me tell t'other furriner them lies."

Well, sir, the feller WAS mad.  "Jes whut I tol' that fool podner of
mine," he says, an' he pull out a dollar an' gives hit to Tom.  Tom jes
sticks out his han' with his thum' turned in jes so, an' the furriner
says, "Well, ef you can't talk, you kin make purty damn good signs";
but he forks over four mo' dollars (he 'lowed ole Tom had saved him a
pile o' money), an' turns his hoss an' pulls up agin.  He was a-gittin'
the land so durned cheap that I reckon he jes hated to let hit go, an'
he says, says he: "Well, hain't the groun' rich?  Won't hit raise no
tabaccy nur corn nur nothin'?"

Ole Tom jes whispers:

"To tell you the p'int-blank truth, stranger, that land's so durned
pore that I hain't nuver been able to raise my voice."

Now, brother, I'm a separATE man, an' I don't inQUIZite into no man's
business--but you ax me straight an' I tell ye straight.  Ole Tom
Perkins kin trade with furriners, fer he have l'arned their ways.  You
watch ole Tom!




GRAYSON'S BABY


The first snow sifted in through the Gap that night, and in a "shack"
of one room and a low loft a man was dead, a woman was sick to death,
and four children were barely alive; and nobody even knew.  For they
were hill people, who sicken, suffer, and sometimes die, like animals,
and make no noise.

Grayson, the Virginian, coming down from the woods that morning, saw
the big-hearted little doctor outside the door of the shack, walking up
and down, with his hands in his pockets.  He was whistling softly when
Grayson got near, and, without stopping, pointed with his thumb within.
The oldest boy sat stolidly on the one chair in the room, his little
brother was on the floor hard by, and both were hugging a greasy stove.
The little girl was with her mother in the bed, both almost out of
sight under a heap of quilts.  The baby was in a cradle, with its face
uncovered, whether dead or asleep Grayson could not tell.  A pine
coffin was behind the door.  It would not have been possible to add to
the disorder of the room, and the atmosphere made Grayson gasp.  He
came out looking white.  The first man to arrive thereafter took away
the eldest boy, a woman picked the baby girl from the bed, and a
childless young couple took up the pallid little fellow on the floor.
These were step-children.  The baby boy that was left was the woman's
own.  Nobody came for that, and Grayson went in again and looked at it
a long while.  So little, so old a human face he had never seen.  The
brow was wrinkled as with centuries of pain, and the little drawn mouth
looked as though the spirit within had fought its inheritance without a
murmur, and would fight on that way to the end.  It was the pluck of
the face that drew Grayson.  "I'll take it," he said.  The doctor was
not without his sense of humor even then, but he nodded.  "Cradle and
all," he said, gravely.  And Grayson put both on one shoulder and
walked away.  He had lost the power of giving further surprise in that
town, and had he met every man he knew, not one of them would have felt
at liberty to ask him what he was doing.  An hour later the doctor
found the child in Grayson's room, and Grayson still looking at it.

"Is it going to live, doctor?"

The doctor shook his head.  "Doubtful.  Look at the color.  It's
starved.  There's nothing to do but to watch it and feed it.  You can
do that."

So Grayson watched it, with a fascination of which he was hardly
conscious.  Never for one instant did its look change--the quiet,
unyielding endurance that no faith and no philosophy could ever bring
to him.  It was ideal courage, that look, to accept the inevitable but
to fight it just that way.  Half the little mountain town was talking
next day--that such a tragedy was possible by the public road-side,
with relief within sound of the baby's cry.  The oldest boy was least
starved.  Might made right in an extremity like his, and the boy had
taken care of himself.  The young couple who had the second lad in
charge said they had been wakened at daylight the next morning by some
