



Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team









THE HEART OF THE HILLS

By John Fox, Jr.


Author of "The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come," "The Trail of the
Lonesome Pine," Etc.


With Four Illustrations By F. C. YOHN




                    IN
              GRATEFUL MEMORY
                    OF
                MY FATHER

    WHO LOVED THE GREAT MOTHER, HER FORMS,
            HER MOODS, HER WAYS.

   TO THE END SHE LEFT HIM THE JOY OF YOUTH
          IN THE COMING OF SPRING

June 28, 1912.






THE HEART OF THE HILLS




I


Twin spirals of blue smoke rose on either side of the spur, crept
tendril-like up two dark ravines, and clearing the feathery green
crests of the trees, drifted lazily on upward until, high above, they
melted shyly together and into the haze that veiled the drowsy face of
the mountain.

Each rose from a little log cabin clinging to the side of a little
hollow at the head of a little creek. About each cabin was a rickety
fence, a patch of garden, and a little cleared hill-side, rocky, full
of stumps, and crazily traced with thin green spears of corn. On one
hill-side a man was at work with a hoe, and on the other, over the
spur, a boy--both barefooted, and both in patched jean trousers upheld
by a single suspender that made a wet line over a sweaty cotton shirt:
the man, tall, lean, swarthy, grim; the boy grim and dark, too, and
with a face that was prematurely aged. At the man's cabin a little girl
in purple homespun was hurrying in and out the back door clearing up
after the noonday meal; at the boy's, a comely woman with masses of
black hair sat in the porch with her hands folded, and lifting her eyes
now and then to the top of the spur. Of a sudden the man impatiently
threw down his hoe, but through the battered straw hat that bobbed up
and down on the boy's head, one lock tossed on like a jetblack plume
until he reached the end of his straggling row of corn. There he
straightened up and brushed his earth-stained fingers across a dullred
splotch on one cheek of his sullen set face. His heavy lashes lifted
and he looked long at the woman on the porch--looked without anger now
and with a new decision in his steady eyes. He was getting a little too
big to be struck by a woman, even if she were his own mother, and
nothing like that must happen again.

A woodpecker was impudently tapping the top of a dead burnt tree near
by, and the boy started to reach for a stone, but turned instead and
went doggedly to work on the next row, which took him to the lower
corner of the garden fence, where the ground was black and rich. There,
as he sank his hoe with the last stroke around the last hill of corn, a
fat fishing-worm wriggled under his very eyes, and the growing man
lapsed swiftly into the boy again. He gave another quick dig, the earth
gave up two more squirming treasures, and with a joyful gasp he stood
straight again--his eyes roving as though to search all creation for
help against the temptation that now was his. His mother had her face
uplifted toward the top of the spur; and following her gaze, he saw a
tall mountaineer slouching down the path. Quickly he crouched behind
the fence, and the aged look came back into his face. He did not
approve of that man coming over there so often, kinsman though he was,
and through the palings he saw his mother's face drop quickly and her
hands moving uneasily in her lap. And when the mountaineer sat down on
the porch and took off his hat to wipe his forehead, he noticed that
his mother had on a newly bought store dress, and that the man's hair
was wet with something more than water. The thick locks had been combed
and were glistening with oil, and the boy knew these facts for signs of
courtship; and though he was contemptuous, they furnished the excuse he
sought and made escape easy. Noiselessly he wielded his hoe for a few
moments, scooped up a handful of soft dirt, meshed the worms in it, and
slipped the squirming mass into his pocket. Then he crept stooping
along the fence to the rear of the house, squeezed himself between two
broken palings, and sneaked on tiptoe to the back porch. Gingerly he
detached a cane fishing-pole from a bunch that stood upright in a
corner and was tiptoeing away, when with another thought he stopped,
turned back, and took down from the wall a bow and arrow with a steel
head around which was wound a long hempen string. Cautiously then he
crept back along the fence, slipped behind the barn into the
undergrowth and up a dark little ravine toward the green top of the
spur. Up there he turned from the path through the thick bushes into an
open space, walled by laurel-bushes, hooted three times surprisingly
like an owl, and lay contentedly down on a bed of moss. Soon his ear
caught the sound of light footsteps coming up the spur on the other
side, the bushes parted in a moment more, and a little figure in purple
homespun slipped through them, and with a flushed, panting face and
dancing eyes stood beside him.

The boy nodded his head sidewise toward his own home, and the girl
silently nodded hers up and down in answer. Her eyes caught sight of
the bow and arrow on the ground beside him and lighted eagerly, for she
knew then that the fishingpole was for her. Without a word they slipped
through the bushes and down the steep side of the spur to a little
branch which ran down into a creek that wound a tortuous way into the
Cumberland.




II

On the other side, too, a similar branch ran down into another creek
which looped around the long slanting side of the spur and emptied,
too, into the Cumberland. At the mouth of each creek the river made a
great bend, and in the sweep of each were rich bottom lands. A century
before, a Hawn had settled in one bottom, the lower one, and a
Honeycutt in the other. As each family multiplied, more land was
cleared up each creek by sons and grandsons until in each cove a clan
was formed. No one knew when and for what reason an individual Hawn and
a Honeycutt had first clashed, but the clash was of course inevitable.
Equally inevitable was it, too, that the two clans should take the
quarrel up, and for half a century the two families had, with
intermittent times of truce, been traditional enemies. The boy's
father, Jason Hawn, had married a Honeycutt in a time of peace, and,
when the war opened again, was regarded as a deserter, and had been
forced to move over the spur to the Honeycutt side. The girl's father,
Steve Hawn, a ne'erdo-well and the son of a ne'er-do-well, had for his
inheritance wild lands, steep, supposedly worthless, and near the head
of the Honeycutt cove. Little Jason's father, when he quarrelled with
his kin, could afford to buy only cheap land on the Honeycutt side, and
thus the homes of the two were close to the high heart of the mountain,
and separated only by the bristling crest of the spur. In time the
boy's father was slain from ambush, and it was a Hawn, the Honeycutts
claimed, who had made him pay the death price of treachery to his own
kin. But when peace came, this fact did not save the lad from taunt and
suspicion from the children of the Honeycutt tribe, and being a
favorite with his Grandfather Hawn down on the river, and harshly
treated by his Honeycutt mother, his life on the other side in the
other cove was a hard one; so his heart had gone back to his own people
and, having no companions, he had made a playmate of his little cousin,
Mavis, over the spur. In time her mother had died, and in time her
father, Steve, had begun slouching over the spur to court the
widow--his cousin's widow, Martha Hawn. Straightway the fact had caused
no little gossip up and down both creeks, good-natured gossip at first,
but, now that the relations between the two clans were once more
strained, there was open censure, and on that day when all the men of
both factions had gone to the county-seat, the boy knew that Steve Hawn
had stayed at home for no other reason than to make his visit that day
secret; and the lad's brain, as he strode ahead of his silent little
companion, was busy with the significance of what was sure to come.

At the mouth of the branch, the two came upon a road that also ran down
to the river, but they kept on close to the bank of the stream which
widened as they travelled--the boy striding ahead without looking back,
the girl following like a shadow. Still again they crossed the road,
where it ran over the foot of the spur and turned down into a deep bowl
filled to the brim with bush and tree, and there, where a wide pool lay
asleep in thick shadow, the lad pulled forth the ball of earth and
worms from his pocket, dropped them with the fishing-pole to the
ground, and turned ungallantly to his bow and arrow. By the time he had
strung it, and had tied one end of the string to the shaft of the arrow
and the other about his wrist, the girl had unwound the coarse
fishing-line, had baited her own hook, and, squatted on her heels, was
watching her cork with eager eyes; but when the primitive little hunter
crept to the lower end of the pool, and was peering with Indian caution
into the depths, her eyes turned to him.

"Watch out thar!" he called, sharply.

Her cork bobbed, sank, and when, with closed eyes, she jerked with all
her might, a big shining chub rose from the water and landed on the
bank beside her. She gave a subdued squeal of joy, but the boy's face
was calm as a star. Minnows like that were all right for a girl to
catch and even for him to eat, but he was after game for a man. A
moment later he heard another jerk and another fish was flopping on the
bank, and this time she made no sound, but only flashed her triumphant
eyes upon him. At the third fish, she turned her eyes for approval--and
got none; and at the fourth, she did not look up at all, for he was
walking toward her.

"You air skeerin' the big uns," he said shortly, and as he passed he
pulled his Barlow knife from his pocket and dropped it at her feet. She
rose obediently, and with no sign of protest began gathering an
apronful of twigs and piling them for a fire. Then she began scraping
one of the fish, and when it was cleaned she lighted the fire. The
blaze crackled merrily, the blue smoke rose like some joyous spirit
loosed for upward flight, and by the time the fourth fish was cleaned,
a little bed of winking coals was ready and soon a gentle sizzling
assailed the boy's ears, and a scent made his nostrils quiver and set
his stomach a-hungering. But still he gave no sign of interest--even
when the little girl spoke at last:

"Dinner's ready."

He did not look around, for he had crouched, his body taut from head to
foot, and he might have been turned suddenly to stone for all the sign
of life he gave, and the little girl too was just as motionless. Then
she saw the little statue come slowly back to quivering life. She saw
the bow bend, the shaft of the arrow drawing close to the boy's paling
cheek, there was a rushing hiss through the air, a burning hiss in the
water, a mighty bass leaped from the convulsed surface and shot to the
depths again, leaving the headless arrow afloat. The boy gave one sharp
cry and lapsed into his stolid calm again.

The little girl said nothing, for there is no balm for the tragedy of
the big fish that gets away. Slowly he untied the string from his
reddened wrist and pulled the arrow in. Slowly he turned and gazed
indifferently at the four crisp fish on four dry twigs with four pieces
of corn pone lying on the grass near them, and the little girl
squatting meekly and waiting, as the woman should for her working lord.
With his Barlow knife he slowly speared a corn pone, picking up a fish
with the other hand, and still she waited until he spoke.

"Take out, Mavie," he said with great gravity and condescension, and
then his knife with a generous mouthful on its point stopped in the
air, his startled eyes widened, and the little girl shrank cowering
behind him. A heavy footfall had crunched on the quiet air, the bushes
had parted, and a huge mountaineer towered above them with a Winchester
over his shoulder and a kindly smile under his heavy beard. The boy was
startled--not frightened.

"Hello, Babe!" he said coolly. "Whut devilmint you up to now?"

The giant smiled uneasily:

"I'm keepin' out o' the sun an' a-takin' keer o' my health," he said,
and his eyes dropped hungrily to the corn pone and fried fish, but the
boy shook his head sturdily.

"You can't git nothin' to eat from me, Babe Honeycutt."

"Now, looky hyeh, Jason--"

"Not a durn bite," said the boy firmly, "even if you air my mammy's
brother. I'm a Hawn now, I want ye to know, an' I ain't goin' to have
my folks say I was feedin' an' harborin' a Honeycutt--'specially you."

It would have been humorous to either Hawn or Honeycutt to hear the big
man plead, but not to the girl, though he was an enemy, and had but
recently wounded a cousin of hers, and was hiding from her own people,
for her warm little heart was touched, and big Babe saw it and left his
mournful eyes on hers.

"An' I'm a-goin' to tell whar I've seed ye," went on the boy savagely,
but the girl grabbed up two fish and a corn pone and thrust them out to
the huge hairy hand eagerly stretched out.

"Now, git away," she said breathlessly, "git away--quick!"

"Mavis!" yelled the boy.

"Shet up!" she cried, and the lips of the routed boy fell apart in
sheer amazement, for never before had she made the slightest question
of his tyrannical authority, and then her eyes blazed at the big
Honeycutt and she stamped her foot.

"I'd give 'em to the meanest dog in these mountains."

The big man turned to the boy.

"Is he dead yit?"

"No, he ain't dead yit," said the boy roughly.

"Son," said the mountaineer quietly, "you tell whutever you please
about me."

The curiously gentle smile had never left the bearded lips, but in his
voice a slight proud change was perceptible.

"An' you can take back yo' corn pone, honey."

Then dropping the food in his hand back to the ground, he noiselessly
melted into the bushes again.

At once the boy went to work on his neglected corn-bread and fish, but
the girl left hers untouched where they lay. He ate silently, staring
at the water below him, nor did the little girl turn her eyes his way,
for in the last few minutes some subtle change in their relations had
taken place, and both were equally surprised and mystified. Finally,
the lad ventured a sidewise glance at her beneath the brim of his hat
and met a shy, appealing glance once more. At once he felt aggrieved
and resentful and turned sullen.

"He throwed it back in yo' face," he said. "You oughtn't to 'a' done
it."

Little Mavis made no answer.

"You're nothin' but a gal, an' nobody'll hold nothin' agin you, but
with my mammy a Honeycutt an' me a-livin' on the Honeycutt side, you
mought 'a' got me into trouble with my own folks." The girl knew how
Jason had been teased and taunted and his life made miserable up and
down the Honeycutt creek, and her brown face grew wistful and her chin
quivered.

"I jes' couldn't he'p it, Jason," she said weakly, and the little man
threw up his hands with a gesture that spoke his hopelessness over her
sex in general, and at the same time an ungracious acceptance of the
terrible calamity she had perhaps left dangling over his head. He
clicked the blade of his Barlow knife and rose.

"We better be movin' now," he said, with a resumption of his old
authority, and pulling in the line and winding it about the cane pole,
he handed it to her and started back up the spur with Mavis trailing
after, his obedient shadow once more.

On top of the spur Jason halted. A warm blue haze transfused with the
