



Produced by David Reed





THE LAST STETSON

By John Fox Jr.




I.

A MIDSUMMER freshet was running over old Gabe Bunch's water-wheel into
the Cumberland. Inside the mill Steve Marcum lay in one dark corner with
a slouched hat over his face. The boy Isom was emptying a sack of corn
into the hopper. Old Gabe was speaking his mind.

Always the miller had been a man of peace; and there was one time when
he thought the old Stetson-Lewallen feud was done. That was when Rome
Stetson, the last but one of his name, and Jasper Lewallen, the last
but one of his, put their guns down and fought with bare fists on a high
ledge above old Gabe's mill one morning at daybreak. The man who was
beaten was to leave the mountains; the other was to stay at home and
have peace. Steve Marcum, a Stetson, heard the sworn terms and saw the
fight. Jasper was fairly whipped; and when Rome let him up he proved
treacherous and ran for his gun. Rome ran too, but stumbled and fell.
Jasper whirled with his Winchester and was about to kill Rome where he
lay, when a bullet came from somewhere and dropped him back to the ledge
again. Both Steve Marcum and Rome Stetson said they had not fired the
shot; neither would say who had. Some thought one man was lying, some
thought the other was, and Jasper's death lay between the two. State
troops came then, under the Governor's order, from the Blue Grass, and
Rome had to drift down the river one night in old Gabe's canoe and on
Out of the mountains for good. Martha Lewallen, who, though Jasper's
sister, and the last of the name, loved and believed Rome, went with
him. Marcums and Braytons who had taken sides in the fight hid in the
bushes around Hazlan, or climbed over into Virginia. A railroad started
up the Cumberland. "Furriners came in to buy wild lands and get out
timber." Civilization began to press over the mountains and down on
Hazlan, as it had pressed in on Breathitt, the seat of another feud,
in another county. In Breathitt the feud was long past, and with good
reason old Gabe thought that it was done in Hazlan.

But that autumn a panic started over from England. It stopped the
railroad far down the Cumberland; it sent the "furriners" home, and
drove civilization back. Marcums and Braytons came in from hiding, and
drifted one by one to the old fighting-ground. In time they took up the
old quarrel, and with Steve Marcum and Steve Brayton as leaders, the
old Stetson-Lewallen feud went on, though but one soul was left in the
mountains of either name. That was Isom, a pale little fellow whom Rome
had left in old Gabe's care; and he, though a Stetson and a half-brother
to Rome, was not counted, because he was only a boy and a foundling, and
because his ways were queer.

There was no open rupture, no organized division--that might happen no
more. The mischief was individual now, and ambushing was more common.
Certain men were looking for each other, and it was a question of
"draw-in' quick 'n' shootin' quick" when the two met by accident, or of
getting the advantage "from the bresh."

In time Steve Marcum had come face to face with old Steve Brayton in
Hazlan, and the two Steves, as they were known, drew promptly. Marcum
was in the dust when the smoke cleared away; and now, after three months
in bed, he was just out again. He had come down to the mill to see Isom.
This was the miller's first chance for remonstrance, and, as usual,
he began to lay it down that every man who had taken a human life must
sooner or later pay for it with his own. It was an old story to Isom,
and, with a shake of impatience, he turned out the door of the mill, and
left old Gabe droning on under his dusty hat to Steve, who, being heavy
with "moonshine," dropped asleep.

Outside the sun was warm, the flood was calling from the dam, and the
boy's petulance was gone at once. For a moment he stood on the rude
platform watching the tide; then he let one bare foot into the water,
and, with a shiver of delight, dropped from the boards. In a moment his
clothes were on the ground behind a laurel thicket, and his slim white
body was flashing like a faun through the reeds and bushes up stream.
A hundred yards away the creek made a great loop about a wet thicket
of pine and rhododendron, and he turned across the bushy neck. Creeping
through the gnarled bodies of rhododendron, he dropped suddenly behind
the pine, and lay flat in the black earth. Ten yards through the
dusk before him was the half-bent figure of a man letting an old army
haversack slip from one shoulder; and Isom watched him hide it with
a rifle under a bush, and go noiselessly on towards the road. It was
Crump, Eli Crump, who had been a spy for the Lewallens in the old feud
and who was spying now for old Steve Brayton. It was the second time
Isom had seen him lurking about, and the boy's impulse was to hurry back
to the mill. But it was still peace, and without his gun Crump was not
dangerous; so Isom rose and ran on, and, splashing into the angry little
stream, shot away like a roll of birch bark through the tawny crest of
a big wave. He had done the feat a hundred times; he knew every rock and
eddy in flood-time, and he floated through them and slipped like an eel
into the mill-pond. Old Gabe was waiting for him.

"Whut ye mean, boy," he said, sharply, "reskin' the fever an' ager this
way? No wonder folks thinks ye air half crazy. Git inter them clothes
now 'n' come in hyeh. You'll ketch yer death o' cold swimmin' this way
atter a fresh."

The boy was shivering when he took his seat at the funnel, but he did
not mind that; some day he meant to swim over that dam. Steve still lay
motionless in the corner near him, and Isom lifted the slouched hat
and began tickling his lips with a straw. Steve was beyond the point of
tickling, and Isom dropped the hat back and turned to tell the miller
what he had seen in the thicket. The dim interior darkened just then,
and Crump stood in the door. Old Gabe stared hard at him without a word
of welcome, but Crump shuffled to a chair unasked, and sat like a toad
astride it, with his knees close up under his arms, and his wizened face
in his hands.

Meeting Isom's angry glance, he shifted his own uneasily.

"Seed the new preacher comm' 'long today?" he asked. Drawing one dirty
finger across his forehead, "Got a long scar 'cross hyeh."

The miller shook his head.

"Well, he's a-comm'. I've been waitin' fer him up the road, but I reckon
I got to git 'cross the river purty soon now."

Crump had been living over in Breathitt since the old feud. He had been
"convicted" over there by Sherd Raines, a preacher from the Jellico
Hills, and he had grown pious. Indeed, he had been trailing after Raines
from place to place, and he was following the circuit-rider now to the
scene of his own deviltry--Hazlan.

"Reckon you folks don't know I got the cirkit-rider to come over hyeh,
do ye?" he went on. "Ef he can't preach! Well, I'd tell a man! He kin
jus' draw the heart out'n a holler log! He 'convicted' me fust night,
over thar in Breathitt. He come up thar, ye know, to stop the feud, he
said; 'n' thar was laughin' from one eendo' Breathitt to t'other; but
thar was the whoppinest crowd thar I ever see when he did come. The
meetin'-house wasn't big enough to hold 'em, so he goes out on the
aidge o' town, n' climbs on to a stump. He hed a woman with him from the
settlemints--she's a-waitin' at Hazlan fer him now-'n' she had a cur'us
little box, 'n' he put her 'n' the box on a big rock, 'n' started in a
callin' 'em his bretherin' 'n' sisteren, 'n' folks seed mighty soon
thet he meant it, too. He's always mighty easylike, tell he gits to the
blood-penalty."

At the word, Crump's listeners paid sudden heed. Old Gabe's knife
stopped short in the heart of the stick he was whittling; the boy looked
sharply up from the running meal into Crump's face and sat still.

Well, he jes prayed to the Almighty as though he was a-talkin' to him
face to face, 'n' then the woman put her hands on that box, 'n' the
sweetes' sound anybody thar ever heerd come outen it. Then she got to
singin'. Hit wusn't nuthin' anybody thar'd ever heerd; but some o' the
women folks was a snifflin' 'fore she got through. He pitched right into
the feud, as he calls hit, 'n' the sin o' sheddin' human blood, I tell
ye; 'n' 'twixt him and the soldiers I reckon thar won't be no more
fightin' in Breathitt. He says, 'n' he always says it mighty loud
--Crump raised his own voice--"thet the man as kills his feller-critter
hev some day got ter give up his own blood, sartin 'n' shore."

It was old Gabe's pet theory, and he was nodding approval. The boy's
parted lips shook with a spasm of fear, and were as quickly shut tight
with suspicion. Steve raised his head as though he too had heard the
voice, and looked stupidly about him.

"I tol' him," Crump went on, "thet things was already a-gettin' kind o'
frolicsome round hyeh agin; thet the Marcums 'n' Braytons was a-takin'
up the ole war, 'n' would be a-plunkin' one 'nother every time they got
together, 'n' a-gittin' the whole country in fear 'n' tremblin'--now
thet Steve Marcum had come back."

Steve began to scowl and a vixenish smile hovered at Isom's lips.

"He knows mighty well--fer I tol' him--thet thar hain't a wuss man in all
these mountains than thet very Steve--" The name ended in a gasp, and the
wizened gossip was caught by the throat and tossed, chair and all, into
a corner of the mill.

"None o' that, Steve!" called the miller, sternly. "Not hyeh. Don't hurt
him now!"

Crump's face stiffened with such terror that Steve broke into a laugh.

"Well, ye air a skeery critter!" he said, contemptuously. "I hain't
goin' to hurt him, Uncl' Gabe, but he must be a plumb idgit, a-talkin'
'bout folks to thar face, 'n' him so puny an' spindlin'! You git!"

Crump picked himself up trembling--"Don't ye ever let me see ye on this
side o' the river agin, now "--and shuffled out, giving Marcum one look
of fear and unearthly hate.

"Convicted!" snorted Steve. "I heerd old Steve Brayton had hired him to
waylay me, 'n' I swar I believe hit's so."

"Well, he won't hev to give him more'n a chaw o' tobaccer now," said
Gabe. "He'll come purty near doin' hit hisseif, I reckon, ef he gits
the chance."

"Well, he kin git the chance ef I gits my leetle account settled with ole
Steve Brayton fust. 'Pears like that old hog ain't satisfied shootin'
me hisself." Stretching his arms with a yawn, Steve winked at Isom and
moved to the door. The boy followed him outside.

"We're goin' fer ole Brayton about the dark o' the next moon, boy," he
said. "He's sort o' s'picious now, 'n' we'll give him a leetle time to
git tame. I'll have a bran'-new Winchester fer ye, Isom. Hit ull be like
ole times agin, when Rome was hyeh. Whut's the matter, boy?" he asked,
suddenly. Isom looked unresponsive, listless.

"Air ye gittin' sick agin?"

"Well, I hain't feelin' much peert, Steve."

"Take keer o' yourself, boy. Don't git sick now. We'll have to watch Eli
Crump purty close. I don't know why I hain't killed thet spyin' skunk
long ago, 'ceptin' I never had a shore an' sartin reason fer doin 'it."

Isom started to speak then and stopped. He would learn more first; and
he let Steve go on home unwarned.

The two kept silence after Marcum had gone. Isom turned away from old
Gabe, and stretched himself out on the platform. He looked troubled. The
miller, too, was worried.

"Jus' a hole in the groun'," he said, half to himself; "that's whut we're
all comm' to! 'Pears like we mought help one 'nother to keep out'n hit,
'stid o' holpin' 'em in."

Brown shadows were interlacing out in the mill-pond, where old Gabe's
eyes were intent. A current of cool air had started down the creek to
the river. A katydid began to chant. Twilight was coming, and the miller
rose.

"Hit's a comfort to know you won't be mixed up in all this devilment,"
he said; and then, as though he had found more light in the gloom:
"Hit's a comfort to know the new rider air shorely a-preachin' the right
doctrine, 'n' I want ye to go hear him. Blood for blood-life fer a life!
Your grandad shot ole Tom Lewallen in Hazlan. Ole Jack Lewallen shot him
from the bresh. Tom Stetson killed ole Jack; ole Jass killed Tom, 'n' so
hit comes down, fer back as I can ricollect. I hev nuver knowed hit to
fail." The lad had risen on one elbow. His face was pale and uneasy, and
he averted it when the miller turned in the door.

"You'd better stay hyeh, son, 'n' finish up the grist. Hit won't take
long. Hev ye got victuals fer yer supper?"

Isom nodded, without looking around, and when old Gabe was gone he rose
nervously and dropped helplessly back to the floor.

"'Pears like old Gabe knows I killed Jass," he breathed, sullenly.
"'Pears like all of 'em knows hit, 'n' air jus' a-tormentin' me."

Nobody dreamed that the boy and his old gun had ended that fight on the
cliff; and without knowing it, old Gabe kept the lad in constant torture
with his talk of the blood-penalty. But Isom got used to it in time,
for he had shot to save his brother's life. Steve Marcum treated him
thereafter as an equal. Steve's friends, too, changed in manner towards
him because Steve had. And now, just when he had reached the point of
wondering whether, after all, there might not be one thing that old Gabe
did not know, Crump had come along with the miller's story, which he had
got from still another, a circuit-rider, who must know the truth. The
fact gave him trouble.

"Mebbe hit's goin' to happen when I goes with Steve atter ole Brayton,"
he mumbled, and he sat thinking the matter over, until a rattle and a
whir inside the mill told him that the hopper was empty. He arose to
fill it, and coming out again, he heard hoof-beats on the dirt road. A
stranger rode around the rhododendrons and shouted to him, asking the
distance to Hazlan. He took off his hat when Isom answered, to wipe the
dust and perspiration from his face, and the boy saw a white scar across
his forehead. A little awestricken, the lad walked towards him.

"Air you the new rider whut's goin' to preach up to Hazlan?" he asked.

Raines smiled at the solemnity of the little fellow. "Yes," he said,
kindly. "Won't you come up and hear me?"

"Yes, sir," he said, and his lips parted as though he wanted to say
something else, but Raines did not notice.

"I wished I had axed him," he said, watching the preacher ride away.
"Uncle Gabe knows might' nigh ever'thing, 'n' he says so. Crump said
the rider said so; but Crump might 'a' been lyin'. He 'most al'ays is. I
wished I had axed him."

Mechanically the lad walked along the millrace, which was made of hewn
boards and hollow logs. In every crevice grass hung in thick bunches to
the ground or tipped wiry blades over the running water. Tightening
a prop where some silvery jet was getting too large, he lifted the
tail-gate a trifle and lay down again on the platform near the old
wheel. Out in the mill-pond the water would break now and then into
ripples about some unwary moth, and the white belly of a fish would
flash from the surface. It was the only sharp accent on the air. The
chant of the katydids had become a chorus, and the hush of darkness
was settling over the steady flow of water and the low drone of the
millstones.

"I hain't afeerd," he kept saying to himself. "I hain't afeerd o'
nothin' nor nobody;" but he lay brooding until his head throbbed, until
darkness filled the narrow gorge, and the strip of dark blue up through
the trees was pointed with faint stars. He was troubled when he rose,
and climbed on Rome's horse and rode homeward--so troubled that he
turned finally and started back in a gallop for Hazlan.

It was almost as Crump had said. There was no church in Hazlan, and, as
in Breathitt, the people had to follow Raines outside the town, and he
preached from the roadside. The rider's Master never had a tabernacle
more simple: overhead the stars and a low moon; close about, the trees
still and heavy with summer; a pine torch over his head like a yellow
plume; two tallow dips hung to a beech on one side, and flicking to the
other the shadows of the people who sat under them. A few Marcums and
Braytons were there, one faction shadowed on Raines's right, one on
his left. Between them the rider stood straight, and prayed as though
talking with some one among the stars. Behind him the voice of the woman
at her tiny organ rose among the leaves. And then he spoke as he had
prayed; and from the first they listened like children, while in their
own homely speech he went on to tell them, just as he would have told
children, a story that some of them had never heard before. "Forgive
your enemies as He had forgiven his," that was his plea. Marcums and
Braytons began to press in from the darkness on each side, forgetting
each other as the rest of the people forgot them. And when the story
was quite done, Raines stood a full minute without a word. No one was
prepared for what followed. Abruptly his voice rose sternly--"Thou
shalt not kill"; and then Satan took shape under the torch. The man was
transformed, swaying half crouched before them. The long black hair fell
across the white scar, and picture after picture leaped from his tongue
with such vividness that a low wail started through the audience, and
women sobbed in their bonnets. It was penalty for bloodshed--not in this
world: penalty eternal in the next; and one slight figure under the dips
staggered suddenly aside into the darkness.

It was Isom; and no soul possessed of devils was ever more torn than
his, when he splashed through Troubled Fork and rode away that night.
Half a mile on he tried to keep his eyes on his horse's neck, anywhere
except on one high gray rock to which they were raised against his
will--the peak under which he had killed young Jasper. There it was
staring into the moon, but watching him as he fled through the woods,
