



Produced by John R. Bilderback and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team.





       [Illustration: SHARPLESS MINIATURE OF WASHINGTON, 1795]



                     The True George Washington



                                By
                        Paul Leicester Ford

             Author of "The Honorable Peter Stirling"
         Editor of "The Writings of Thomas Jefferson" and
                 "The Sayings of Poor Richard"


"That I have foibles, and perhaps many of them, I shall not deny. I should
esteem myself, as the world would, vain and empty, were I to arrogate
perfection."

--_Washington_


"Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice."

--_Shakespeare_



                               1896
                                BY
                      J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

                         _Tenth Edition_

Electrotyped and Printed by J.B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia, U




                       THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
                                TO
                        WILLIAM F. HAVEMEYER,

IN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF THE INDEBTEDNESS OF THE AUTHOR TO HIS COLLECTION
                                 OF
                           WASHINGTONIANA.



+Note+

In every country boasting a history there may be observed a tendency to
make its leaders or great men superhuman. Whether we turn to the legends
of the East, the folk-lore of Europe, or the traditions of the native
races of America, we find a mythology based upon the acts of man gifted
with superhuman powers. In the unscientific, primeval periods in which
these beliefs were born and elaborated into oral and written form, their
origin is not surprising. But to all who have studied the creation of a
mythology, no phase is a more curious one than that the keen, practical
American of to-day should engage in the same process of hero-building
which has given us Jupiter, Wotan, King Arthur, and others. By a slow
evolution we have well-nigh discarded from the lives of our greatest men
of the past all human faults and feelings; have enclosed their greatness
in glass of the clearest crystal, and hung up a sign, "Do not touch."
Indeed, with such characters as Washington, Franklin, and Lincoln we have
practically adopted the English maxim that "the king can do no wrong." In
place of men, limited by human limits, and influenced by human passions,
we have demi-gods, so stripped of human characteristics as to make us
question even whether they deserve much credit for their sacrifices and
deeds.

But with this process of canonization have we not lost more than we have
gained, both in example and in interest? Many, no doubt, with the greatest
veneration for our first citizen, have sympathized with the view
expressed by Mark Twain, when he said that he was a greater man than
Washington, for the latter "couldn't tell a lie, while he could, but
wouldn't" We have endless biographies of Franklin, picturing him in all
the public stations of life, but all together they do not equal in
popularity his own human autobiography, in which we see him walking down
Market Street with a roll under each arm, and devouring a third. And so it
seems as if the time had come to put the shadow-boxes of humanity round
our historic portraits, not because they are ornamental in themselves, but
because they will make them examples, not mere idols.

If the present work succeeds in humanizing Washington, and making him a
man rather than a historical figure, its purpose will have been fulfilled.
In the attempt to accomplish this, Washington has, so far as is possible,
been made to speak for himself, even though at times it has compelled the
sacrifice of literary form, in the hope that his own words would convey a
greater sense of the personality of the man. So, too, liberal drafts have
been made on the opinions and statements of his contemporaries; but,
unless the contrary is stated or is obvious, all quoted matter is from
Washington's own pen. It is with pleasure that the author adds that the
result of his study has only served to make Washington the greater to him.

The writer is under the greatest obligation to his brother, Worthington
Chauncey Ford, not merely for his numerous books on Washington, of which
his "Writings of George Washington" is easily first in importance of all
works relating to the great American, but also for much manuscript
material which he has placed at the author's service. Hitherto unpublished
facts have been drawn from many other sources, but notably from the rich
collection of Mr. William F. Havemeyer, of New York, from the Department
of State in Washington, and from the Historical Society of Pennsylvania.
To Mr. S.M. Hamilton, of the former institution, and to Mr. Frederick D.
Stone, of the latter, the writer is particularly indebted for assistance.



CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I.--FAMILY RELATIONS

II.--PHYSIQUE

III.--EDUCATION

IV.--RELATIONS WITH THE FAIR SEX

V.--FARMER AND PROPRIETOR

VI.--MASTER AND EMPLOYER

VII.--SOCIAL LIFE

VIII.--TASTES AND AMUSEMENTS

IX.--FRIENDS

X.--ENEMIES

XI.--SOLDIER

XII.--CITIZEN AND OFFICE-HOLDER



List of Illustrations with Notes



MINIATURE OF WASHINGTON. By JAMES SHARPLESS

Painted for Washington in 1795, and presented by him to Nelly (Calvert)
Stuart, widow of John Parke Custis, Washington's adopted son. Her son
George Washington Parke Custis, in whose presence the sittings were made,
often spoke of the likeness as "almost perfect."


MEMORIAL TABLET OF LAURENCE AND AMEE WASHINGTON, IN SULGRAVE CHURCH,
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE

The injury of the effigy of Laurence Washington and the entire
disappearance of the effigy of Amee antedate the early part of the present
century, and probably were done in the Puritan period. Since the above
tracing was made the brasses of the eleven children have been stolen,
leaving nothing but the lettering and the shield of the Washington arms.


BETTY WASHINGTON, WIFE OF FIELDING LEWIS

Painted about 1750, and erroneously alleged to be by Copley. Original in
the possession of Mr. R. Byrd Lewis, of Marmion, Virginia.


JOHN AND MARTHA CUSTIS

Original in the possession of General G.W. Custis Lee, of Lexington,
Virginia.


MINIATURE OF ELEANOR PARKE CUSTIS

From the miniature by Gilbert Stuart, in the possession of her grandson,
Edward Parke Lewis Custis, of Hoboken, New Jersey.


FICTITIOUS PORTRAIT OF WASHINGTON

The lettering reads, "Done from an original Drawn from the Life, by Alex'r
Campbell of Williamsburg in Virginia. Published as the act directs
9 Sept'r 1775 by C. Shepherd." It is the first engraved portrait of
Washington, and was issued to satisfy the English curiosity concerning the
new commander-in-chief of the rebels. From the original print in the
possession of Mr. W.F. Havemeyer, of New York.


COPY SHEET FROM YOUNG MAN'S COMPANION

The sheet from which Washington modelled his handwriting, and to which his
earliest script shows a marked resemblance. From the original in the
possession of the author.


LETTER TO MRS. FAIRFAX

Showing changes and corrections made by Washington at a later date. From
original copy-book in the Washington MSS. in the Department of State.


PORTRAIT OF MARY PHILIPSE

From the original formerly in the possession of Mr. Frederick Philipse.


PORTRAIT OF MARTHA CUSTIS

Alleged to have been painted by Woolaston about 1757. It has been asserted
by Mr. L.W. Washington and Mr. Moncure D. Conway that this is a portrait
of Betty Washington Lewis, but in this they are wholly in error, as proof
exists that it is a portrait of Mrs. Washington before her second
marriage.


SURVEY OF MOUNT VERNON HILLS

Made by Washington as a boy, and one of the earliest specimens of his
work. The small drawing of the house represents it as it was before
Washington enlarged it, and is the only picture of it known. Original in
the Department of State.


MOUNTAIN ROAD LOTTERY TICKET

From the original in the Historical Society of Pennsylvania.


FAMILY GROUP

Painted by Edward Savage about 1795, and issued as a large engraving in
1798. The original picture is now in the possession of Mr. William F.
Havemeyer, of New York.


DINNER INVITATION

The official invitation while President, from the original in the
possession of the author.


DANCING AGREEMENT

This gives only the first few names, many more following. The original was
formerly in the possession of Mr. Thomas Biddle, of Philadelphia.


BOOK-PLATE OF WASHINGTON

This is a slight variation from the true Washington coat of arms, the
changes being introduced by Washington. From the original in the
possession of the author.


SURVEY OF WAKEFIELD

Washington's birthplace. The survey was made in 1743, on the property
coming into the possession of Augustine Washington (second) from his
father, with the object of readjusting the boundary-lines. Original in the
possession of Mr. William F. Havemeyer, of New York.


WASHINGTON FAMILY BIBLE

This record, with the exception of the interlined note concerning Betty
Washington Lewis, is in the handwriting of George Washington, and was
written when he was about sixteen years old. Original in the possession of
Mrs. Lewis Washington, of Charlestown, West Virginia.


MINIATURE OF MRS. WASHINGTON

By an unknown artist. From the original in the possession of General G.W.
Custis Lee, of Lexington, Virginia.


EARLIEST AUTOGRAPH OF WASHINGTON

On a fly-leaf of the volume to which this title belongs is written, "This
autograph of Genl. Washington's name is believed to be the earliest
specimen of his writing, when he was probably not more than 8 or 9 years
of age." This is a note by G.C. Washington, to whom Washington's library
descended. Original in the possession of the Boston Athenaeum.


RULES OF CIVILITY

First page of Washington's boyish transcript, written when he was about
thirteen years of age. Used here by courtesy of Mr. S.M. Hamilton and
"Public Opinion," who are preparing a fac-simile edition of the entire
rules.


LIFE MASK BY HOUDON

Taken by Houdon in October, 1785. From the replica in the Historical
Society of Pennsylvania.


TITLE-PAGE OF JOURNAL OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, 1754

Of this first edition but two copies are known. From the original in the
Lenox Library.


PRESIDENTIAL HOUSE IN PHILADELPHIA

Philadelphia offered to furnish the house for the President during the
time Congress sat in that city, but Washington "wholly declined living in
any public building," and rented this house from Robert Morris. Though it
was considered one of the finest in the city, Washington several times
complained of being cramped.




THE TRUE GEORGE WASHINGTON


I

FAMILY RELATIONS


Although Washington wrote that the history of his ancestors was, in his
opinion, "of very little moment," and "a subject to which I confess I have
paid very little attention," few Americans can prove a better pedigree.
The earliest of his forebears yet discovered was described as "gentleman,"
the family were granted lands by Henry the Eighth, held various offices of
honor, married into good families, and under the Stuarts two were knighted
and a third served as page to Prince Charles. Lawrence, a brother of the
three thus distinguished, matriculated at Oxford as a "generosi filius"
(the intermediate class between sons of the nobility, "armigeri filius,"
and of the people, "plebeii filius"), or as of the minor gentry. In time
he became a fellow and lector of Brasenose College, and presently obtained
the good living of Purleigh. Strong royalists, the fortunes of the family
waned along with King Charles, and sank into insignificance with the
passing of the Stuart dynasty. Not the least sufferer was the rector of
Purleigh, for the Puritan Parliament ejected him from his living, on the
charge "that he was a common frequenter of ale-houses, not only himself
sitting dayly tippling there ... but hath oft been drunk,"--a charge
indignantly denied by the royalists, who asserted that he was a "worthy
Pious man, ... always ... a very Modest, Sober Person;" and this latter
claim is supported by the fact that though the Puritans sequestered the
rich living, they made no objection to his serving as rector at Brixted
Parva, where the living was "such a Poor and Miserable one that it was
always with difficulty that any one was persuaded to accept of it."

Poverty resulting, John, the eldest son of this rector, early took to the
sea, and in 1656 assisted "as second man in Sayleing ye Vessel to
Virginia." Here he settled, took up land, presently became a county
officer, a burgess, and a colonel of militia. In this latter function he
commanded the Virginia troops during the Indian war of 1675, and when his
great-grandson, George, on his first arrival on the frontier, was called
by the Indians "Conotocarius," or "devourer of villages," the formidable
but inappropriate title for the newly-fledged officer is supposed to have
been due to the reputation that John Washington had won for his name among
the Indians eighty years before.

[Illustration: TABLET TO LAURENCE WASHINGTON AND HIS FAMILY IN SULGRAVE
CHURCH]

