



Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










[Illustration: His audience was fairly hanging on his words]


THE ROSE IN THE RING

By GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON


WITH FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOR BY A. I. KELLER






CONTENTS

BOOK ONE

I THE FUGITIVE

II IN THE DRESSING TENT

III DAVID ENTERS THE SAWDUST RING

IV A STRANGER APPEARS ON THE SCENE

V SOMETHING ABOUT THE BRADDOCKS

VI DAVID JENISON'S STORY

VII THE BROTHERS CRONK

VIII AN INVITATION TO SUPPER

IX A THIEF IN THE NIGHT

X LOVE WINGS A TIMID DART

XI ARTFUL DICK GOES VISITING

XII IN WHICH MANY THINGS HAPPEN

XIII THE SALE


BOOK TWO

I THE DAUGHTER OF COLONEL GRAND

II THE STRANGER AT THE HALL

III THE MAN WHO SERVED HIS TIME

IV THE DELIVERY OF A TELEGRAM

V THE LOVE THAT WAS STAUNCH

VI DOOR-STEPS

VII TOM BRADDOCK'S PROMISE

VIII COLONEL GRAND AND THE CLONKS

IX IN THE LITTLE TRIANGULAR "SQUARE"

X THE BLACK HEADLINES




ILLUSTRATIONS

His audience was fairly hanging on his words.. _Frontispiece_

"It is my money!" cried David

Her lips parted in amazement, tremulously struggling into a smile of
wonder and unbelief.

"This is the one, great, solitary hour in your life."




BOOK ONE




CHAPTER I

THE FUGITIVE


The gaunt man led the way. At his heels, doggedly, came the two short
ones, fagged, yet uncomplaining; all of them drenched to the skin by
the chill rain that swirled through the Gap, down into the night-ridden
valley below. Sky was never so black. Days of incessant storm had left
it impenetrably overcast.

These men trudged--or stumbled--along the slippery road which skirted
the mountain's base. Soggy, unseen farm lands and gardens to their
left, Stygian forests above and to their right. Ahead, the far-distant
will-o-the-wisp flicker of many lights, blinking in the foggy shroud.
Three or four miles lay between the sullen travelers and the town that
cradled itself in the lower end of the valley.

Night had stolen early upon the dour spring day. The tall man who led
carried a rickety, ill-smelling lantern that sent its feeble rays no
farther ahead than a dozen paces; it served best to reveal the face of
the huge silver watch which frequently was drawn from its owner's coat
pocket.

Eight o'clock,--no more,--and yet it seemed to these men that they had
plowed forever through the blackness of this evil night, through a
hundred villainous shadows by unpointed paths. Mile after mile, they
had traversed almost impassable roads, unwavering persistence in
command of their strength, heavy stoicism their burden. Few were the
words that had passed between them during all those weary miles. An
occasional oath, muffled but impressive, fell from the lips of one or
the other of those who followed close behind the silent, imperturbable
leader. The tall man was as silent as the unspeakable night itself.

It was impossible to distinguish the faces of these dogged
night-farers. The collars of their coats were turned up, their throats
were muffled, and the broad rims of their rain-soaked hats were far
down over the eyes. There was that about them which suggested the
unresented pressure of firearms inside the dry breast-pockets of long
coats.

This was an evening in the spring of 1875, and these men were forging
their way along a treacherous mountain road in Southwestern Virginia. A
word in passing may explain the exigency which forced the travelers to
the present undertaking. The washing away of a bridge ten miles farther
down the valley had put an end to all thought of progress by rail, for
the night, at least. Rigid necessity compelled them to proceed in the
face of the direst hardships. Their mission was one which could not be
stayed so long as they possessed legs and stout hearts. Checked by the
misfortune at the bridge, there was nothing left for them but to make
the best of the situation: they set forth on foot across the mountain,
following the short but more arduous route from the lower to the upper
valley. Since three o'clock in the afternoon they had been struggling
along their way, at times by narrow wagon roads, not infrequently by
trails and foot paths that made for economy in distance.

The tall man strode onward with never decreasing strength and
confidence; his companions, on the contrary, were faint and sore and
scowling. They were not to the mountains born; they came from the
gentle lowlands by the sea,--from broad plantations and pleasant
byways, from the tidewater country. He was the leader on this ugly
night, and yet they were the masters; they followed, but he led at
their bidding. They had known him for less than six hours, and yet they
put their lives in his hands; another sunrise would doubtless see him
pass out of their thoughts forever. He served the purpose of a single
night. They did not know his name--nor he theirs, for that matter; they
took him on faith and for what he was worth--five dollars.

"Are those the lights of the town?" panted one of the masters, a throb
of hope in his breast. The tall man paused; the others came up beside
him. He stretched a long arm in the direction of the twinkling lights,
far ahead.

"Yas, 'r," was all that he said.

"How far?" demanded the other laboriously.

"'Bout fo'h mile."

"Road get any better?"

"Yas, 'r."

"Can we make it by nine, think?"

"Yas, 'r."

"We'd better be moving along. It's half-past seven now."

"Yas, 'r."

Once more they set forward, descending the slope into the less
hazardous road that wound its way into the town of S----, then, as now,
a thriving place in the uplands. The ending of a deadly war not more
than ten years prior to the opening of this tale had left this part of
fair Virginia gasping for breath, yet too proud to cry for help.
Virginia, the richest and fairest and proudest of all the seceding
states, was but now finding her first moments of real hope and relief.
Her fortunes had gone for the cause; her hopes had sunk with it.

Both were now rising together from the slough into which they had been
driven by the ruthless Juggernaut of Conquest. The panic of '73 meant
little to the people of this fair commonwealth; they had so little then
to lose, and they had lost so much. The town of S---, toward which
these weary travelers turned their steps, was stretching out its hands
to clasp Opportunity and Prosperity as those fickle commodities
rebounded from the vain-glorious North; the smile was creeping back
into the haggard face of the Southland; the dollars were jingling now
because they were no longer lonely. The bitterness of life was not so
bitter; an ancient sweetness was providing the leaven. The Northern
brother was relaxing; he was even washing the blood from his hands and
extending them to raise the sister he had ravished. There was
forgiveness in the heart of fair Virginia--but not yet the desire to
forget. The South was coming into its own once more--not the old South,
but a new one that realized.

Intermittent strains of music came dancing up into the hills from the
heart of S--. The wayfarers looked at each other in the darkness and
listened in wonder to these sounds that rose above the swish of the
restless rain.

"It's a band," murmured one of the two behind.

"Yas, 'r; a circus band," vouchsafed the guide, a sudden eagerness in
his voice. "Van Slye's Great and Only Mammoth Shows--"

"A circus?" interrupted one of the men gruffly. "Then the whole town is
full of strangers. That's bad for us, Blake."

"I don't see why. He's more than likely to be where the excitement's
highest, ain't he? He's not too old for that. We'll find him in that
circus tent, Tom, if he's in the town at all."

"First circus they've had in S---- in a dawg's age," ventured the
guide, with the irrelevancy of an excited boy. "Rice's was there once,
I can't remember jest when, an' they was some talk of Barnum las' yeah,
they say, but he done pass us by. He's got a Holy Beheemoth that sweats
blood this yeah, they say. Doggone, I'd like to see one." The guide had
not ventured so much as this, all told, in the six hours of their
acquaintanceship.

"Well, let's be moving on. I'm wet clear through," shivered Blake.

Silence fell upon them once more. No word was spoken after that, except
in relation to an oath of exasperation; they swung forward into the
lower road, their sullen eyes set on the lights ahead. Heavy feet,
dragging like hundredweights, carried them over the last weary mile.
Into the outskirts of the little town they slunk. The streets were
deserted, muddy, and lighted but meagerly from widely separated oil
lamps set at the tops of as many unstable posts.

Some distance ahead there was a vast glow of light, lifting itself
above the housetops and pressing against the black dome that hung low
over the earth. The rollicking quickstep of a circus band came dancing
over the night to meet the footsore men. There were no pedestrians to
keep them company. The inhabitants of S---- were inside the tents
beyond, or loitering near the sidewalls with singular disregard for the
drizzling rain that sifted down upon their unmindful backs or blew
softly into the faces of the few who enjoyed the luxury of "umberells."
Despite the apparent solitude that kept pace with them down the narrow
street,--little more than a country lane, on the verge of graduating
into a thoroughfare,--the three travelers were keenly alert; their
squinting, eager eyes searched the shadows beside and before them;
their feet no longer dragged through the slippery, glistening bed of
the road; every movement, every glance signified extreme caution.

Slowly they approached the vacant lots beyond the business section of
the town, known year in and year out to the youth of S---- as "the show
grounds." Now they began to encounter straggling, envious atoms of the
populace, wanderers who could not produce the admission fee and who
were not permitted by the rough canvasmen to venture inside the charmed
circle laid down by the "guy-ropes." At the corner of the tented common
stood the "ticket wagon," the muddy plaza in front of it torn by the
footprints of many human beings and lighted by a great gasoline lamp
swung from a pole hard by. Beyond was the main entrance of the animal
tent, presided over by uniformed ticket takers. Here and there, in the
gloomy background, stood the canvas and pole wagons, shining in their
wetness against the feeble light that oozed through the opening between
the sidewall and the edge of the flapping main top, or glistening with
sudden brightness in response to the passing lantern or torch in the
hand of a rubber-coated minion who "belonged to the circus,"--a vast
honor, no matter how lowly his position may have been. Costume and
baggage wagons, their white and gold glory swallowed up in the maw of
the night, stood backed up against the dressing-tent off to the right.
The horse tent beyond was even now being lowered by shadowy, mystic
figures who swore and shouted to each other across spaces wide and
spaces small without regulating the voice to either effort. Horses,
with their clanking trace-chains, in twos and fours, slipped in and out
of the shadows, drawing great vehicles which rumbled and jarred with
the noise peculiar to circus wagons: tired, underfed horses that paid
little heed to the curses or the blows of the men who handled them, so
accustomed were they to the proddings of life.

And inside the big tent the band played merrily, as only a circus band
can play, jangling an accompaniment to the laughter and the shouts of
the delighted multitude sitting in the blue-boarded tiers about the
single ring with its earthen circumference, its sawdust carpet and its
dripping lights.

The smell of the thing! Who has ever forgotten it? The smell of the
sawdust, the smell of the gleaming lights, the smell of animals and the
smell of the canvas top! The smell of the damp handbills, the programs
and the bags of roasted peanuts! Incense! Never-to-be-forgotten incense
of our beautiful days!

Warm and dry and bright under the spreading top with its two "center
poles" and its row of "quarters"; cold, dreary and sordid outside in
the real world where man and beast worked while others seemed to play.

Groups of canvasmen now began to tear down the animal tent--the
"menagerie," as it has always been known to the man who pays admission.
An hour later, when the big show is over, the spectators will stream
forth, even as their own blue seats begin to clatter to earth behind
them, and they will blink with amazement to find themselves in the open
air, instead of in the menagerie tent. As if by magic it has
disappeared, and with it the sideshow and its banners, the Punch and
Judy show, the horse tent, the cook tent, the blacksmith shop. Where
once stood a dripping white city, now stretches a barren, ugly waste of
unhallowed, unfamiliar ground, flanked by the solitary temple of tinsel
and sawdust which they have just left behind, and which even now is
being desolated by scowling men in overalls. The crowd oozes forth, to
find itself completely lost in the night, all points of the compass at
odds, no man knowing east from west or north from south in the strange
surroundings. The "lot" they have known so well and crossed so often
has been transformed into a trackless wilderness, through which strange
objects rumble and creak, over which queer, ghastly lights play for the
benefit of grumbling men from another world.

Blake and his companion, standing apart from the lank, wide-eyed guide,
