

E-text prepared by Louise Pryor, Janet Blenkinship, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 16719-h.htm or 16719-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/7/1/16719/16719-h/16719-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/7/1/16719/16719-h.zip)





THE HUSBANDS OF EDITH

by

GEORGE BARR McCUTCHEON

With Illustrations by Harrison Fisher
and Decorations by Theodore B. Hapgood

New York
Dodd, Mead & Company
The University Press, Cambridge, U.S.A.

1908






     *     *     *     *     *     *     *


     OTHER BOOKS BY MR. McCUTCHEON

        NEDRA
        BEVERLY OF GRAUSTARK
        THE DAY OF THE DOG
        THE PURPLE PARASOL
        THE SHERRODS
        GRAUSTARK
        CASTLE CRANEYCROW
        BREWSTER'S MILLIONS
        JANE CABLE
        COWARDICE COURT
        THE DAUGHTER OF ANDERSON CROW
        THE FLYERS


 *     *     *     *     *     *     *



  [Illustration: Motif]


  [Illustration: "'Don't you think Connie is a perfect
  dear?'" (page 54)]




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                         Page

     I HUSBANDS AND WIFE                            1

    II THE SISTER-IN-LAW                           17

   III THE DISTANT COUSINS                         37

    IV THE WOULD-BE BROTHER-IN-LAW                 51

     V THE FRIENDS OF THE FAMILY                   70

    VI OTHER RELATIONS                             87

   VII THE THREE GUARDIANS                        102

  VIII THE PRODIGAL HUSBAND                       116





ILLUSTRATIONS

  "'Don't you think Connie is a perfect
  dear?'" (page 54)                            Frontispiece

  Brock                                             24

  Katherine                                         44

  "She began to detect a decided
  falling off in his ardour"                        74

  "'I _do_ love you,' she said simply"              98





THE HUSBANDS OF EDITH




CHAPTER I

HUSBANDS AND WIFE


Brock was breakfasting out-of-doors in the cheerful little garden of the
Hôtel Chatham. The sun streamed warmly upon the concrete floor of the
court just beyond the row of palms and oleanders that fringed the rail
against which his _Herald_ rested, that he might read as he ran, so to
speak. He was the only person having _déjeuner_ on the "terrace," as he
named it to the obsequious waiter who always attended him. Charles was
the magnet that drew Brock to the Chatham (that excellent French hotel
with the excellent English name). It is beside the question to remark
that one is obliged to reverse the English when directing a _cocher_ to
the Chatham. The Paris cabman looks blank and more than usually
unintelligent when directed to drive to the Chatham, but his face
radiates with joy when his fare is inspired to substitute Sha-_t'am_,
with distinct emphasis on the final syllable. Then he cracks his whip
and lashes his sorry nag, with passive appreciation of his own
astuteness, all the way to the Rue Daunou. The street is so short that
he almost invariably takes one to _it_ instead of to the hotel itself.
But one must say Sha-_t'am_!

Charles was standing, alert but pensive, quite near at hand, ready to
replenish the bowl with honey (Brock was especially fond of it), but
with his eyes cocked inquiringly, even eagerly, in the direction of an
upstairs window across the court, beyond which a thoughtless guest of
the establishment was making her toilette in blissful ignorance of the
fact that the flimsy curtains were not tightly drawn. Brock had gone to
the Chatham for years just because Charles was a fixture there. Charles
spoke the most execrably picturesque English, served with a
punctiliousness that savoured almost of the overbearing, and boasted
that he had acquired the art of making American cocktails in the Waldorf
during a five weeks' residence in the United States.

It was a lazy morning. Brock was happy. He was even interested when a
porter came forth and unravelled a long roll of garden hose, with which
he abruptly began to splash water upon the concrete surface of the court
without regard for distance or direction. Moreover, he proceeded to
water the palms at Brock's elbow, operating from a spot no less than
twenty feet away. He likewise was casting inquiring glances at divers
windows--few if any at the plants--until the faithful Charles restored
him to earth by means of certain subdued injunctions and less moderate
gesticulations, from which it could be readily gathered that "M'sieur
was eating, not bathing." Whereupon the utterly uncrushed porter
splashed water at right angles, much to Brock's relief, while all his
fellow porters, free or engaged, took up the quarrel with rare disregard
for cause or justice. A _femme de chambre_, from a convenient window,
joined in the hubbub without in the least knowing what it was all
about. Monsieur's comfort must be preserved: that seemed to be the issue
in which, at once, all were united. "M'sieur will pardon the boy,"
apologised Charles in deepest humility, taking much for granted. "It
will be very warm to-day. Your _serviette_, M'sieur--it is damp.
Pardon!" He flew away and back with another napkin. "Of course, M'sieur,
the Chatham is not the Waldorf," he announced deprecatingly.
"_Parbleu_," beating himself on the forehead, "I forgot! M'sieur does
not like the Waldorf. _Eh, bien_, Paris is not New York, no." Having
sufficiently humbled Paris, he withdrew into the background, rubbing his
hands as if he were cleansing them of something unsightly. Brock spread
one of the buttered biscuits with honey and inwardly admitted that Paris
was _not_ New York.

He was a good-looking chap of thirty or thereabouts, an American to the
core,--bright-eyed, keen-witted, smooth-faced, virile. From boyhood's
earliest days he had spent a portion of his summers in Europe. Two or
three years of his life had been employed in the Beaux Arts,--fruitful
years, for Brock had not wasted his opportunities. He had gone in for
architecture and building. To-day he stood high among the younger men in
New York,--prosperous, successful, and a menace to the old cry that a
son of the rich cannot thrive in his father's domain. Nowadays he came
to the Old World for his breathing spells. He was able to combine
dawdling and development without sacrificing one for the other, wherein
lies the proof that his vacations were not akin to those taken by most
of us.

The fortnight in Paris was to be followed by a week in St. Petersburg
and a brief tour of Sweden and Norway. His stay in the gay city was
drawing to a close. That very morning he expected to book for St.
Petersburg, leaving in three days.

Suddenly his glance fell upon a name in the society column before him,
"Roxbury Medcroft." His face lighted up with genuine pleasure. An old
friend, a boon companion in bygone days, was this same Medcroft,--a
broad-minded, broad-gauged young Englishman who had profited by a stay
of some years in the States. They had studied together in Paris and they
had toiled together in New York. This is what he read: "Mr. and Mrs.
Roxbury Medcroft, of London, are stopping at the Ritz, _en route_ to
Vienna. Mr. Medcroft will attend the meeting of Austrian Architects, to
be held there next week, and, with his wife, will afterwards spend a
fortnight in the German Alps, the guests of the Alfred Rodneys, of
Seattle."

"Dear old Rox, I must look him up at once," mused Brock. "The Rodneys of
Seattle? Never heard of 'em." He looked at his watch, signed his check,
deposited the usual franc, acknowledged Charles's well-practised smile
of thanks, and pushed back his chair, his gaze travelling involuntarily
toward the portals of the American bar across the court, just beyond the
_concierge's_ quarters. Simultaneously a tall figure emerged from the
bar, casting eager glances in all directions,--a tall figure in a
checked suit, bowler hat, white reindeer gloves, high collar, and grey
spats. Brock came to his feet quickly. The monocle dropped from the
other's eye, and his long legs carried him eagerly toward the American.

"Medcroft! Bless your heart! I was just on the point of looking you up
at the Ritz. It's good to see you," Brock cried as they clasped hands.

"Of all the men and of all the times, Brock, you are the most
opportune," exclaimed the other. "I saw that you were here and bolted my
breakfast to catch you. These beastly telephones never work. Oh, I say,
old man, have you finished yours?"

"Quite--but luckily I didn't have to bolt it. You're off for Vienna, I
see. Sit down, Rox. Won't you have another egg and a cup of coffee? Do!"

"Thanks and no to everything you suggest. Wot you doing for the next
half-hour or so? I'm in a deuce of a dilemma and you've got to help me
out of it." The Englishman looked at his watch and fumbled it nervously
as he replaced it in his upper coat pocket. "That's a good fellow,
Brock. You _will_ be the ever present help in time of trouble, won't
you?"

"My letter of credit is at your disposal, old man," said Brock promptly.
He meant it. It readily may be seen from this that their friendship is
no small item to be considered in the development of this tale.

"My dear fellow, that's the very thing I'm eager to thrust upon you--my
letter of credit," exclaimed the other.

"What's that?" demanded Brock.

"I say, Brock, can't we go up to your rooms? Dead secret, you know.
Really, old chap, I mean it. No one must get a breath of it. That's why
I'm whispering. I'm not a lunatic, so don't stare like that. I'd do as
much for you if the conditions were reversed."

"I dare say you would, Rox, but what the devil is it you want me to do?"

"Do I appear to be agitated?"

"Well, I should say so."

"Well, I _am_. You know how I loathe asking a favour of anyone.
Besides, it's rather an extraordinary one I'm going to ask of you. Came
to me in a flash this morning when I saw your name in the paper. Sort of
inspiration, 'pon my word. I think Edith sees it the same as I, although
I haven't had time to go into it thoroughly with her. She's ripping, you
know; pluck to the very core."

Brock's face expressed bewilderment and perplexity.

"Won't you have another drink, old man?" he asked gently.

"Another? Hang it all, I haven't had one in a week. Come along. I must
talk it all over with you before I introduce you to her. You must be
prepared."

"Introduce me to whom?" demanded Brock, pricking up his ears. He was
following Medcroft to the elevator.

"To my wife--Edith," said Medcroft, annoyed by the other's obtuseness.

"Does it require preparation for an ordeal so charming?" laughed Brock.
He was recalling the fact that Medcroft had married a beautiful
Philadelphia girl some years ago in London, a young lady whom he had
never seen, so thoroughly expatriated had she become in consequence of
almost a lifetime residence in England. He remembered now that she was
rich and that he had sent her a ridiculously expensive present and a
congratulatory cablegram at the time of the wedding. Also, it occurred
to him that the Medcrofts had asked him to visit them at their
shooting-box for several seasons in succession, and that their town
house was always open to him. While he had not ignored the invitations,
he had never responded in person. He began to experience twinges of
remorse: Medcroft was such a good fellow!

The Londoner did not respond to the innocuous query. He merely stared
in a preoccupied, determined manner at the succeeding _étages_ as they
slipped downward. At the fourth floor they disembarked, and Brock led
the way to his rooms, overlooking the inner court. Once inside, with the
door closed, he turned upon the Englishman.

"Now, what's up, Rox? Are you in trouble?" he demanded.

"Are we quite alone?" Medcroft glanced significantly at the transom and
the half-closed bathroom door. With a laugh, Brock led him into the
bathroom and out, and then closed the transom.

"You're darned mysterious," he said, pointing to a chair near the
window. Medcroft drew another close up and seated himself.

"Brock," he said, lowering his voice and leaning forward impressively,
"I want you to go to Vienna in my place." Brock stared hard. "You are a
godsend, old man. You're just in time to do me the greatest of favours.
It's utterly impossible for me to go to Vienna as I had planned, and yet
it is equally unwise for me to give up the project. You see, I've just
got to be in London and Vienna at the same time."

"It will require something more than a stretch of the imagination to do
that, old man. But I'm game, and my plans are such that they can be
changed readily to oblige a friend. I shan't mind the trip in the least
and I'll be only too happy to help you out! 'Gad, I thought by your
manner that you were in some frightful difficulty. Have a cigaret."

"By Jove, Brock, you're a brick," cried Medcroft, shaking the other's
hand vigorously. At the same time his face expressed considerable
uncertainty and no little doubt as to the further welfare of his as yet
partially divulged proposition.

"It's easy to be a brick, my boy, if it involves no more than the
changing of a single letter in one's name. I'd like to attend the
convention, anyway," said Brock amiably.

"Well, you see, Brock," said Medcroft lamely, "I fear you don't quite
appreciate the situation. I want you to pose as Roxbury Medcroft."

