



Produced by Charles Franks, Charles Aldarondo, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.









MR. BINGLE

BY George Barr McCutcheon

Author of "Graustark," "The Hollow of Her Hand," "The Prince of
Graustark," etc.

With Illustrations by JAMES MONTGOMERY FLAGG





CONTENTS

CHAPTER

    I THE FIVE LITTLE SYKESES
   II RELATING TO AN ODD RELATION
  III THE DEATH OF UNCLE JOE
   IV FORTY MINUTES LATE
    V THE STORY OF JOSEPH
   VI THE HONORABLE THOMAS SINGLETON BINGLE
  VII SEARCHERS REWARDED
 VIII THE AFFAIRS OF AMY AND DICK
   IX THE MAN CALLED HINMAN
    X MR. BINGLE THINKS OF BECOMING AN ANGEL
   XI A TIMELY LESSON IN LOVE
  XII THE BIRTH OF NAPOLEON
 XIII TROUBLE, TROUBLE, TROUBLE!
  XIV THE LAW'S LAST WORD
   XV DECEMBER
  XVI ANOTHER CHRISTMAS EVE
 XVII THE LAST TO ARRIVE




CHAPTER I

THE FIVE LITTLE SYKESES


A coal fire crackled cheerily in the little open grate that supplied
warmth to the steam-heated living-room in the modest apartment of Mr.
Thomas S. Bingle, lower New York, somewhere to the west of Fifth Avenue
and not far removed from Washington Square--in the wrong direction,
however, if one must be precise in the matter of emphasizing the social
independence of the Bingle family--and be it here recorded that without
the genial aid of that grate of coals the living-room would have been a
cheerless place indeed. Mr. Bingle had spent most of the evening in
trying to coax heat from the lower regions into the pipes of the
seventh heaven wherein he dwelt, and without the slightest sign of
success. The frigid coils in the corner of the room remained obdurate.
If they indicated the slightest symptom of warmth during the evening,
it was due entirely to the expansive generosity of the humble grate and
not because they were moved by inward remorse. They were able, however,
to supply the odour of far-off steam, as of an abandoned laundry; and
sometimes they chortled meanly, revealing signs of an energy that in
anything but a steam pipe might have been mistaken for a promise to do
better.

Mr. Bingle poked the fire and looked at his watch. Then he crossed to
the window, drew the curtains and shade aside and tried to peer through
the frosty panes into the street, seven stories below. A holly wreath
hung suspended in the window, completely obscured from view on one side
by hoar frost, on the other by a lemon-coloured window shade that had
to be handled with patience out of respect for a lapsed spring at the
top. He scraped a peep-hole in the frosty surface, and, after drying
his fingers on his smoking jacket, looked downward with eyes a-squint.

"Do sit down, Tom," said his wife from her chair by the fireplace. "A
watched pot never boils. You can't see them from the window, in any
event."

"I can see the car when it stops at the corner, my dear," said Mr.
Bingle, enlarging the peep-hole with a vigour that appeared to be
aggravated by advice. "Melissa said seven o'clock and it is four
minutes after now."

"You forget that Melissa didn't start until after she had cleared away
the dinner things. She--"

"I know, I know," he interrupted, still peering. "But that was an hour
ago, Mary. I think a car is stopping at the corner now. No! It didn't
stop, so there must have been some one waiting to get on instead of
off."

"Do come and sit down. You are as fidgety as a child."

"Dear me," said Mr. Bingle, turning away from the window with a shiver,
"how I pity the poor unfortunates who haven't a warm fire to sit beside
tonight. It is going to be the coldest night in twenty years, according
to the--there! Did you hear that?" He stepped to the window once more.
The double ring of a street-car bell had reached his ears, and he knew
that a car had stopped at the corner below. "According to the weather
report this afternoon," he concluded, re-crossing the room to sit down
beside the fire, very erect and expectant, a smile on his pinched,
eager face. He was watching the hall door.

It was Christmas Eve. There were signs of the season in every corner of
the plain but cosy little sitting-room. Mistletoe hung from the
chandelier; gay bunting and strands of gold and silver tinsel draped
the bookcase and the writing desk; holly and myrtle covered the wall
brackets, and red tissue paper shaded all of the electric light globes;
big candles and little candles flickered on the mantelpiece, and some
were red and some were white and yet others were green and blue with
the paint that Mr. Bingle had applied with earnest though artless
disregard for subsequent odours; packages done up in white and tied
with red ribbon, neatly double-bowed, formed a significant centrepiece
for the ornate mahogany library table--and one who did not know the
Bingles would have looked about in quest of small fry with popping,
covetous eyes and sleekly brushed hair. The alluring scent of gaudily
painted toys pervaded the Christmas atmosphere, quite offsetting the
hint of steam from more fortunate depths, and one could sniff the odour
of freshly buttered pop-corn. All these signs spoke of children and the
proximity of Kris Kringle, and yet there were no little Bingles, nor
had there ever been so much as one!

Mr. and Mrs. Bingle were childless. The tragedy of life for them lay
not in the loss of a first-born, but in the fact that no babe had ever
come to fill their hungry hearts with the food they most desired and
craved. Nor was there any promise of subsequent concessions in their
behalf. For fifteen years they had longed for the boon that was denied
them, and to the end of their simple, kindly days they probably would
go on longing. Poor as they were, neither would have complained if fate
had given them half-a-dozen healthy mouths to feed, as many wriggling
bodies to clothe, and all the splendid worries that go with colic,
croup, measles, mumps, broken arms and all the other ailments,
peculiar, not so much to childhood as they are paramount to parenthood.

Lonely, incomplete lives they led, with no bitterness in their souls,
loving each other the more as they tried to fill the void with songs of
resignation. Away back in the early days Mr. Bingle had said that
Christmas was a bleak thing without children to lift the pall--or
something of the sort.

Out of that well-worn conclusion--oft expressed by rich and poor
alike--grew the Bingle Foundation, so to speak. No Christmas Eve was
allowed to go by without the presence of alien offspring about their
fire-lit hearth, and no strange little kiddie ever left for his own bed
without treasuring in his soul the belief that he had seen Santa Claus
at last--had been kissed by him, too--albeit the plain-faced, wistful
little man with the funny bald-spot was in no sense up to the
preconceived opinions of what the roly--poly, white-whiskered,
red-cheeked annual visitor from Lapland ought to be in order to make
dreams come true.

The Bingles were singularly nephewless, nieceless, cousinless. There
was no kindly-disposed relative to whom they could look for the loan of
a few children on Christmas Eve, nor would their own sensitiveness
permit them to approach neighbours or friends in the building with a
well-meant request that might have met with a chilly rebuff. One really
cannot go about borrowing children from people on the floor below and
the floor above, especially on Christmas Eve when children are so much
in demand, even in the most fortunate of families. It is quite a
different matter at any other time of the year. One can always borrow a
whole family of children when the mother happens to feel the call of
the matinee or the woman's club, and it is not an uncommon thing to
secure them for a whole day in mid-December. But on Christmas Eve,
never! And so Mr. and Mrs. Bingle, being without the natural comforts
of home, were obliged to go out into the world searching for children
who had an even greater grudge against circumstances. They frequently
found their guests of honour in places where dishonour had left them,
and they gave them a merry Christmas with no questions asked.

The past two Christmas Eves had found them rather providentially
supplied with children about whom no questions had ever been asked: the
progeny of a Mr. and Mrs. Sykes. Mr. Sykes being dead, the care and
support of five lusty youngsters fell upon the devoted but far from
rugged shoulders of a mother who worked as a saleswoman in one of the
big Sixth Avenue shops, and who toiled far into the night before
Christmas in order that forgetful people might be able to remember
without fail on the morning thereafter. She was only too glad to lend
her family to Mr. and Mrs. Bingle. More than that, she was ineffably
glad, on her own account, that it was Christmas Eve; it signified the
close of a diabolical season of torture at the hands of a public that
believes firmly in "peace on earth" but hasn't the faintest conception
of what "good will toward men" means when it comes to shopping at
Christmas-time.

Mrs. Sykes' sister Melissa had been maid-of-all-work in the modest
establishment of Mr. and Mrs. Bingle for a matter of three years and a
half. It was she who suggested the Sykes family as a happy solution to
the annual problem, and Mr. Bingle almost hugged her for being so
thoroughly competent and considerate!

It isn't every servant, said he, who thinks of the comfort of her
employers. Most of 'em, said he, insist on going to a chauffeurs' ball
or something of the sort on Christmas Eve, but here was a jewel-like
daughter of Martha who actually put the interests of her master and
mistress above her own, and complained not! And what made it all the
more incomprehensible to him was the fact that Melissa was quite a
pretty girl. There was no reason in the world why she shouldn't have
gone to the ball and had a good time instead of thinking of them in
their hours of trouble. But here she was, actually going out of her way
to be kind to her employers: supplying a complete family for Christmas
Eve purposes and never uttering a word of complaint!

The more he thought of it, the prettier she became. He mentioned it to
his wife and she agreed with him. Melissa was much too pretty, said
Mrs. Bingle, entirely without animus. And she was really quite a
stylish sort of girl, too, when she dressed up to go out of a Sunday.
Much more so, indeed, than Mrs. Bingle herself, who had to scrimp and
pinch as all good housewives do if they want to succeed to a new dress
once a year.

Melissa had something of an advantage over her mistress in that she
received wages and was entitled to an afternoon off every fortnight.
Mrs. Bingle did quite as much work about the house, ate practically the
same food, slept not half so soundly, had all the worry of making both
ends meet, practised a rigid and necessary economy, took no afternoons
off, and all without pecuniary compensation--wherein rests support for
the contention that Melissa had the better of her mistress when all is
said and done. Obviously, therefore, Mrs. Bingle was not as well off as
her servant. True, she sat in the parlour while Melissa sat in the
kitchen, but to offset this distinction, Melissa could sing over her
pans and dishes.

Mr. Bingle, good soul, insisted on keeping a servant, despite the
strain on his purse, for no other reason than that he couldn't bear the
thought of leaving Mrs. Bingle alone all day while he was at the bank.
(Lest there should be some apprehension, it should be explained that he
was a bookkeeper at a salary of one hundred dollars a month, arrived at
after long and faithful service, and that Melissa had but fifteen
dollars a month, food and bed.) Melissa was company for Mrs. Bingle,
and her unfailing good humour extended to Mr. Bingle when he came home
to dinner, tired as a dog and in need of cheer. She joined in the
table-talk with unresented freedom and she never failed to laugh
heartily over Mr. Bingle's inspired jokes. Altogether, Melissa was well
worth her wage. She was sunshine and air to the stifled bookkeeper and
his wife.

And now, for the third time, she was bringing the five rollicking
Sykeses to the little flat beyond Washington Square, and for the
thousandth time Mr. and Mrs. Bingle wondered how such a treasure as
Melissa had managed to keep out of heaven all these years.

Mr. Bingle opened the front door with a great deal of ceremony the
instant the rickety elevator came to a stop at the seventh floor, and
gave greeting to the five Sykeses on the dark, narrow landing. He
mentioned each by name and very gravely shook their red-mittened paws
as they sidled past him with eager, bulging eyes that saw only the
Christmas trappings in the room beyond.

"Merry Christmas," said the five, not quite in one voice but with
well-rehearsed vehemence, albeit two tiny ones, in rapt contemplation
of things beyond, quite neglected their duty until severely nudged by
Melissa, whereupon they said it in a shrill treble at least six times
without stopping.

"I am very pleased to see you all," said Mr. Bingle, beaming. "Won't
you take off your things and stay awhile?"

It was what he always said to them, and they always said, "Yes, thank
you," following out instructions received on the way down town, and
then, in some desperation, added, "Mr. Bingle," after a sententious
whisper from their aunt.

They were a rosy, clean-scrubbed lot, these little Sykeses. Their
mother may not have fared overly well herself, but she had contrived to
put flesh and fat on the bones of her progeny, and you would go a long
way before you would find a plumper, merrier group of children than
those who came to the Bingle flat on Christmas Eve in their very best
garments and with their very best appetites. The eldest was ten, the
youngest four, and it so happened that the beginning and the end of the
string were boys, the three in between being Mary, Maud, and Kate.

Mrs. Bingle helped them off with their coats and caps and mufflers,
then hugged them and lugged them up to the fire, while Melissa removed
her skunk tippet, her poney coat and a hat that would have created envy
in the soul of a less charitable creature than the mistress of the
house.

"And now," said Mr. Bingle, confronting the group, "who made you?"

"God, Mr. Bingle," said the five Sykeses, very much after the habit of
a dog that is ordered to "speak."

"And who was it that said, 'Suffer little children to come unto me?'"

"Jesus, Mr. Bingle," said the five Sykeses, eyeing the pile on the
table.

"And where do you expect to go when you die?" demanded Mr. Bingle, with
great severity.

"Heaven!" shouted the perfectly healthy Sykeses.

"How is your mother, Mary?" asked Mrs. Bingle, always a rational woman.

Mary bobbed. "She's working, ma'am," said she, and that was all she
knew about her mother's state of health.

"Are you cold?" inquired Mr. Bingle, herding them a little closer to
the grate.

"Yes," said two of the Sykeses.

"Sir," admonished Melissa.

"Sir!" said all of the Sykeses.

"Now, draw up the chairs," said Mr. Bingle, clearing his throat. "Mary,
you'd better take Kate and Georgie on your lap, and suppose you hold
Maud, Melissa. It will be more cosy." This was his way of overcoming
the shortage in chairs.

Now, it was Mr. Bingle's custom to read "The Christmas Carol" on
Christmas Eve. It was his creed, almost his religion, this
heart-breaking tale by Dickens. Not once, but a thousand times, he had
proclaimed that if all men lived up to the teachings of "The Christmas
Carol" the world would be sweeter, happier, nobler, and the churches
could be put to a better use than at present, considering (as he said)
that they now represent assembling places for people who read neither
Dickens nor the Scripture but sing with considerable intelligence. It
was his contention that "The Christmas Carol" teaches a good many
things that the Church overlooks in its study of Christ, and that the
